Cluster #9: 11 stories
US reports 4.1 percent annual GDP growth in Q2.
U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an annual rate of 4.1 percent in the second quarter, according to “advance” figures released by the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) on Friday. The Q2 figure, representing annually adjusted growth from April to June, increased from the first quarter’s adjusted rate of 2.2 percent. The second quarter showed the fastest quarterly growth since the third quarter of 2014, when the economy grew 4.9 percent.The BEA reported that the increase in GDP growth “reflected accelerations in PCE [personal consumption expenditures] and in exports, a smaller decrease in residential fixed investment, and accelerations in federal government spending and in state and local spending.”Consumer spending, the PCE figure, accelerated to a 4 percent annual growth rate in Q2, up from 0.5 percent in Q1. Consumer spending accounts for roughly 70 percent of U.S. economic activity. Exports increased 9.3 percent in Q2, while imports grew 0.5 percent. The Trump administration introduced new tariffs on foreign products in Q2, and foreign countries, such as China, announced retaliatory tariffs on U.S. products, including soybeans. This led some consumers in other countries to purchase an increased quantity of soybeans in anticipation of foreign taxes on the product, accounting for some of the increases in exports, The Washington Post reported. Second quarter business investment also grew 7.3 percent, and government spending increased at a 2.1 percent rate.President Donald Trump called the numbers “amazing” and “very sustainable,” in an unscheduled press conference outside the White House on Friday morning. “We’re going to get a lot higher than these numbers and these are great numbers.” During the 2016 presidential campaign, he pledged to double GDP growth to above 4 percent. “My Administration remains very focused on the issues that will encourage economic growth — that’s what we’re all about,” Trump , according to the White House. The Associated Press reported that some analysts predicted that Q3 growth will decrease to about 3 percent.The U.S. Federal Reserve has forecast annual growth will be 2.8 percent this year, 2.4 percent in 2019 and 2 percent in 2020. Its forecast is based, in part, on a gradual decrease in economic stimulus created by tax cuts and government spending. Paul Ashworth, chief U.S. economist at Capital Economics, predicted that “growth will slow markedly from mid-2019 onwards,” citing the same factors as the Fed, plus a possible rise in federal interest rates. He also  that the 2.8 percent growth over the past year “is a bit better than it has done recently, but is in no way the strongest growth during this expansion.”The bureau’s Q2 figures are based on preliminary data available, and a second, revised set of figures is scheduled to be released on Aug. 29, the BEA . 

Fed raises interest rates a quarter point for second time this year.
The U.S. Federal Reserve announced Wednesday it was raising the federal funds interest rate by a quarter percentage point for the second time this year, to a recommended range of between 1.75 and 2 percent. The Fed , “the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate,” based on information it received since it met in May.The Fed predicted the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) would grow 2.8 percent in 2018, an increase from its forecast of 2.7 percent in March.“On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have moved close to 2 percent,” the Fed announced. It also  it would make future adjustments to the federal funds rate, with the objective of 2 percent inflation and “maximum” employment. The federal funds rate refers to the interest rate banks or “depository institutions” charge for overnight loans to other banks, which are needed to maintain their reserve requirements, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) website explains. The “reserve requirement” is a minimum amount of money the Federal Reserve requires a bank to have at a given time, often about 10 percent of an individual bank’s total deposits. It is designed to avoid bank failures should depositors make too many withdrawals, according to Investopedia. The Fed projected median federal funds rates of 2.4 percent in 2018, 3.1 percent in 2019 and 3.4 percent in 2020. The numbers it projected in March were 2.1 percent in 2018, 2.9 percent in 2019 and 3.4 percent in 2020. The Fed forecasted 2.4 percent GDP growth in 2019, and 2 percent in 2020. The forecast for core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, is 2.1 percent for 2018, 2019 and 2020. The unemployment rate was forecast to be 3.6 percent in 2018, the Fed reported, and would decrease to an estimated 3.5 percent in 2019 and 2020. These figures are down from its March projections, which were 3.8 percent unemployment in 2018, and 3.6 percent in 2019 and 2020. The current unemployment rate of 3.8 percent is the lowest since 2000.The Federal Reserve raised the federal funds rate three times in 2017.

Fed raises interest rates a quarter point, increases 2018 GDP forecast to 2.7.
The U.S. Federal Reserve announced Wednesday that it had increased the federal funds rate by a quarter percentage point to a recommended range of 1.5 to 1.75 percent. “The economic outlook has strengthened in recent months,” the Fed  in a statement. It predicted gross domestic product (GDP) would grow 2.7 percent in 2018, an increase from its forecast of 2.5 percent in December.The announcement was made after Jerome Powell led his first meeting as chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Trump appointed Powell to the position. He replaced Democrat Janet Yellen last month.The Fed  it will make future adjustments to the federal funds rate with the objective of “maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.” It projects federal funds rates of 2.1 percent in 2018, 2.9 percent in 2019 and 3.4 percent in 2020. According to the FOMC website, “The federal funds rate is the interest rate at which depository institutions lend balances at the Federal Reserve to other depository institutions overnight.”The Fed forecasts 2.4 percent GDP growth in 2019, and 2 percent in 2020. The forecast for core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, was 1.9 percent for 2018, and 2.1 percent for 2019 and 2020. The Fed forecasts the unemployment rate will be 3.8 percent in 2018 and will decrease to 3.6 percent in 2019 and 2020. The Federal Reserve raised the federal funds rate three times in 2017. 

Dow Jones closes down 4.6% in largest one-day point decline.
On Monday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average declined 4.6 percent to 24,345.75 points. The 1,175-point decrease was the largest one-day point decline in the index’s history, and the largest in percentage terms since August 2011. On Friday, the U.S. Department of Labor reported that average hourly earnings for private sector workers increased 2.9 percent compared to a year earlier. The increase was greater than anticipated and may lead to higher inflation, and the Federal Reserve could respond by raising interest rates, The Wall Street Journal reported. Investors sold positions in stocks on Monday and invested in bonds, which benefit from higher interest rates, BBC reported. Also on Monday, the Nasdaq Composite declined 3.8 percent to 6,967.53. The Standard P 500) declined 4.1 percent to 2,648.94 points. London’s FTSE 100 index closed down 1.46 percent, and Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 finished down 2.55 percent. “We’re always concerned when the market loses any value but we’re also confident in the economy’s fundamentals,” the White House  in response to the market decline.The Dow Jones has gained almost 40 percent since President Donald Trump was elected, CNN reported.

US unemployment benefit claims decline to lowest in almost 45 years.
The number of U.S. citizens filing for unemployment benefits declined to the lowest level in almost 45 years last week, the Labor Department reported on Thursday. The four-week average decreased by 10,000 claims, to 224,500. During the week ending Feb. 3, initial claims decreased to a seasonally adjusted 221,000.The number of claims for financial compensation, which are granted to unemployed people who meet certain conditions, have remained below 300,000 for 153 straight weeks. By contrast, there were 586,000 unemployment claims in December 2008, one year after the recession began.The Labor Department also reported that the unemployment rate has been at a 17-year low of 4.1 percent for the last four months. Average hourly earnings rose by 2.9 percent in January compared to a year earlier, and 200,000 more jobs were created last month. In addition, the number of those receiving benefits on an ongoing basis fell by 33,000 to 1,923,000  in the week ending Jan. 27. This week, the Dow Jones experienced the largest single-day decline in the index’s history, declining 1,175 points, or 4.6 percent, on Monday. 

US Federal Reserve maintains interest rate.
The U.S. Federal Reserve kept interest rates unchanged, Fed Chair Janet Yellen announced in a press conference Wednesday. The central bank maintained its forecast for a year-end benchmark interest rate of 1.25 to 1.5 percent, which is 0.25 percentage points higher than it is now. Yellen also  the Fed would begin to reduce its $4.5 trillion asset portfolio in October. The Fed’s assets include holdings of Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities, according to its website. Its balance sheet increased by $3.7 trillion during three rounds of “quantitative easing” in response to the recession of 2007-2009. The Fed purchased bonds with the aim of increasing the amount of money in circulation and encouraging economic growth, CNBC reported. The planned reduction in assets will be gradual, the Fed announced, beginning with $6 billion in Treasuries and $4 billion in mortgage-backed securities per month. This amount is scheduled to increase every three months, until it reaches $30 million and $20 million, respectively. No end date for the reduction has been given.The U.S. economy grew at a 2.1 percent annual rate in the first half of 2017. The Fed increased its median estimate for economic growth over the entire year from 2.2 to 2.4 percent.

US employment increases by 164,000 jobs in April; unemployment rate decreases to 3.9%.
In April, the U.S. unemployment rate was 3.9 percent, and nonfarm payroll employment increased by 164,000 jobs, according to a report by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. This is the lowest unemployment rate since 2000 and the 91st consecutive month of job gains, according to NBC News. Also in April, average hourly earnings increased by 4 cents to $26.84.Unemployment rates among specific groups of workers were as follows:	Adult men, 3.7 percent (unchanged since March).	Adult women, 3.5 percent (down from 3.7 percent in March).	Teenagers, 12.9 percent (down from 13.5 percent in March).	White, 3.6 percent (unchanged since March).	Black or African American, 6.6 percent (down from 6.9 percent in March).	Asian, 2.8 percent (down from 3.1 percent in March).	Hispanic or Latino, 4.8 percent (down from 5.1 percent in March).Industries that had increased employment included:	Professional and business services (added 54,000 jobs).	Manufacturing (added 24,000 jobs).	Health care (added 24,000 jobs).	Mining (added 8,000 jobs).The bureau also adjusted its employment reports for February and March, reducing February’s increase of 326,000 jobs to an increase of 324,000, and revising March’s numbers from an increase of 103,000 jobs to an increase of 135,000.

US holiday retail sales up 4.9 percent from 2016, MasterCard says.
Mastercard SpendingPulse  Tuesday that retail sales increased an estimated 4.9 percent between Nov. 1 and Dec. 24 compared to the same period last year. It was the largest year-over-year increase in holiday retail sales since 2011. Online sales accounted for between 11 and 12 percent of all purchases during the period, according to Sarah Quinlan, a senior vice president at MasterCard. MasterCard estimated the figures based on its credit card activity in stores and online, and based on surveys of purchases made with other forms of payment.The National Retail Federation, a trade association,  that its final holiday sales data, due in January, would meet or exceed its forecast of $678.8 to $682 billion for the holiday period. The U.S. Department of Commerce is scheduled to release its fourth-quarter report on retail e-commerce on Feb. 16, 2018, and its December 2017 advanced monthly retail report on Jan. 12, 2018.Factors contributing to retail spendingThe Wall Street Journal cited analysts and economists saying that the increases in retail sales were due to high consumer confidence and a low unemployment rate.The Consumer Confidence Index (CCI) was at a 17-year high of 129.5 in November, up from 107.1 last year. The CCI is a calculation that measures consumers’ perceptions of current business and employment conditions, and their expectations about business conditions, employment, and income for the next six months, according to its website. It is based on survey results collected by The Conference Board business group. The U.S. unemployment rate was at a 17-year low of 4.1 percent in October and November. Retail spending in 2017Consumer credit card debt was $757 billion, an increase of 11 percent compared to last year, and its highest level since 2008, according to credit-reporting agency Experian PLC. Credit-card delinquency rates increased in the third quarter of this year. Customer Growth Partners, a research firm, estimated that consumers will spend an additional $73 billion between Dec. 25 and Jan. 1.Nearly 7,000 stores closed this year and bankruptcies increased 30 percent compared to last year, according to CNNMoney. 

US Federal Reserve increases interest rates for third time in 2017.
The U.S. Federal Reserve announced an increase of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate on Wednesday, and adjusted economic growth projections for 2018. The rate increase — which raises the rate to a target range of 1.25 to 1.5 percent — is the third this year. Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen  the Federal Open Market Committee “expects the labor market to remain strong, with sustained job creation, ample opportunities for workers and rising wages.”According to the Fed's quarterly forecasts, the median estimate for economic growth increased from 2.1 percent to 2.5 percent. The committee lowered the median estimate for unemployment to 3.9 percent by the end of 2018, a reduction from September’s projection of 4.1 percent.Earlier Wednesday, the Labor Department reported consumer inflation at 1.7 percent in the 12 months through November. According to the Atlanta Fed’s GDPNow tracking estimate, U.S. gross domestic product grew by more than 3 percent in the second and third quarters of 2017, and is expected to expand 2.9 percent in the fourth quarter.

US employment increases by 223,000 jobs in May; unemployment rate decreases to 3.8%.
In May, the U.S. unemployment rate was 3.8 percent, and nonfarm payroll employment increased by 223,000 jobs, according to a report by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. This is the lowest unemployment rate since 2000 and the 92nd consecutive month of job gains, according to the Wall Street Journal. Also in May, average hourly earnings increased by eight cents to $26.92.Unemployment rates among specific groups of workers were as follows:	Adult men, 3.5 percent (down from 3.7 percent in April).	Adult women, 3.3 percent (down from 3.5 percent in April).	Teenagers, 12.8 percent (down from 12.9 percent in March).	White, 3.5 percent (down from 3.6 percent in April).	Black or African American, 5.9 percent (down from 6.6 percent in April).	Asian, 2.1 percent (down from 2.8 percent in April).	Hispanic or Latino, 4.9 percent (up from 4.8 percent in April).Industries that had increased employment included:	Retail trade (added 31,000 jobs).	Health care (added 29,000 jobs).	Construction (added 25,000 jobs).	Professional and technical services (added 23,000 jobs).	Transportation and warehousing (added 19,000 jobs).	Manufacturing (added 18,000 jobs).	Mining (added 6,000 jobs). The bureau also adjusted its employment reports for March and April, revising March’s increase of 135,000 jobs to an increase of 155,000, and revising April’s numbers from an increase of 164,000 jobs to an increase of 159,000.

US adds 313,000 jobs in February, unemployment rate remains at 4.1%.
The U.S. added 313,000 new non-farm jobs last month, according to U.S. Department of Labor statistics released on Friday. The unemployment rate remained at 4.1 percent for the fifth consecutive month, as the new jobs were offset by 806,000 people entering the workforce. Average hourly earnings for private, non-farm jobs increased by 2.6 percent compared with the same period last year. It was a 4 cent increase since January, to an average hourly wage of $26.75. The average work week was at 34.5 hours, an increase of 0.1 hours.In February, there were about 6.7 million unemployed people (those who have actively looked for work in the past four weeks), and 373,000 so-called “discouraged workers” (those who are not looking for work because they think there are no available jobs for them). That represents a decrease of 29 percent since the same period last year. There were an additional 1.2 million people who had sought employment within the last year but stopped looking because they were attending school, had family responsibilities or other reasons.Two weeks ago, the Federal Reserve estimated that “the labor market in early 2018 appears to be near or a little beyond full employment.” It  unemployment was “somewhat below most estimates of its natural rate,” in its Feb. 23 report. The Department of Labor bases its calculations in part on household surveys.

Cluster #14: 7 stories
EU Parliament votes to review whether Hungary violated law.
The European Union Parliament voted on Wednesday to initiate a review of whether Hungary had violated EU law through a number of actions, including allegedly limiting the media and denying refugees equal rights. The EU Parliament will also review whether any alleged actions by the member state warrants penalties or sanctions. Hungary denied the allegations.The EU Parliament alleged that Hungary violated its Charter of Fundamental Rights, which include “respect for democracy, equality, the rule of law and human rights.” The EU outlines the review process in Article 7 of its charter. In its announcement, the EU Parliament listed several “concerns” it had with the Hungarian government, including: the functions of its constitutional and electoral systems; whether its judiciary remains independent; corruption and conflicts of interest; privacy and data protection; freedom of expression, religion, and association; academic freedom; the right to equal treatment; minority rights; the rights of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees; and economic and social rights.Hungarian President János Áder signed a law on June 28 that made it illegal for human rights workers and community volunteers to provide certain services to migrants and asylum seekers. The punishment includes a jail sentence of up to one year. According to Reporters Without Borders, business associates of Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán have bought several media outlets with the intention of creating a so-called “pro-government media bubble” meant to promote the government’s positions on topics such as immigration.According to the EU Parliament, this is the first time that it has called on EU members to potentially penalize a member state to “prevent a systemic threat to the union’s founding values.”Orbán  the EU’s decision was a response to Hungary’s refusal to take in the number of refugees required by an EU-wide resettlement quota plan. Hungary has refused to take in refugees since the EU enacted temporary intake quotas in 2015.Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Péter Szijjártó , “The decision of the European Parliament on the adoption of the [report on Hungary’s alleged EU violations] is the petty revenge of the pro-immigration politicians.” Szijjártó  Hungary would be “reviewing the available opportunities for legal redress.”The EU Parliament voted 448 to 197, with 48 abstentions, to initiate Article 7 procedures against Hungary. To initiate Article 7, an “absolute majority” of members (376) must participate in the vote and two thirds of the votes cast, excluding the abstentions, must vote in favor of proceeding. The process to initiate Article 7 began when EU Parliament member Judith Sargentini from the Netherlands issued a report listing Hungary’s alleged violations, based on information provided by independent bodies such as Amnesty International, the Civil Liberties Union for Europe, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.“In the week that we debate the state of the Union, the European Parliament sends out an important message: We stand up for the rights of all Europeans, including Hungarian citizens and we defend our European values,” Sargentini  of Wednesday’s vote.“Now it is up to the European leaders to take their responsibility and stop watching from the sidelines as the rule of law is destroyed in Hungary. This is unacceptable for a Union that is built on democracy, the rule of law and fundamental rights.”The EU’s 28 individual member states will now vote on whether to approve the EU Parliament’s proposal to initiate Article 7. If approved by a four-fifths majority, the European Council may impose sanctions on Hungary or temporarily remove its EU voting rights.

Hungary criminalizes ‘facilitating’ illegal immigration.
Hungary’s parliament passed laws on Wednesday that make it illegal to aid undocumented immigrants. The bills, referred to as “Stop Soros” measures, specify sentences of up to one year in prison for “facilitating” illegal immigration. Non-governmental organization (NGO) workers could be jailed under the new law if an NGO helps or campaigns for asylum seekers, according to BBC. The new law would criminalize helping refugees fill in forms or providing information to them on the process for seeking asylum, according to the Hungarian Helsinki Committee, a human rights group.The new law also makes it so migrants cannot claim the need for protection if they are applying from a country where they are not subject to persecution, such as if they first arrived in another EU country before attempting to enter Hungary as asylum-seekers.Interior Minister Sandor Pinter , "The Hungarian people rightfully expects the government to use all means necessary to combat illegal immigration and the activities that aid it.” Pinter added, "The Stop Soros package of bills serves that goal, making the organization of illegal immigration a criminal offense. We want to use the bills to stop Hungary from becoming a country of immigrants."Amnesty International Europe Director Gauri van Gulik , "Criminalizing essential and legitimate human rights work is a brazen attack on people seeking safe haven from persecution and those who carry out admirable work to help them.” The Venice Commission of the Council of Europe asked for the vote on the bills to be delayed until it published its review of them on Friday, BBC reported. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of Europe authored the review, and have criticized Hungary’s new law as “arbitrary,” alleging it contravenes European law.The “Stop Soros” legislation was named after George Soros, a Hungarian-born billionaire who, until last month, had a base of operations of his pro-democracy Open Society Foundations organization in Hungary. The NGO moved to Germany last month, citing “an increasingly repressive political and legal environment.”The Hungarian parliament also passed a constitutional amendment stating “alien populations cannot be settled” in Hungary. The EU has a migrant relocation plan to distribute more than 150,000 Syrian, Iraqi and Eritrean asylum seekers throughout the EU, according to NPR.In 2015, 177,000 migrants sought asylum in Hungary. Hungary accepted a few hundred of those applicants, BBC reported. In 2017, the number of applications for asylum was 3,200. Hungarian government statistics show 3,555 refugees living in Hungary as of April. There were 342 registered asylum seekers in the first four months of this year and the government approved 279, The Guardian reported. Hungary has a population of 10 million.

Q&A: Migration to the European Union.
What is the European migration ‘crisis’?European Union countries have been experiencing higher numbers of migrants seeking asylum over the past few years — a trend often referred to as the “immigration crisis” or “migrant crisis.” More than 1.7 million such migrants have arrived in the EU since 2014, most of them fleeing the Syrian conflict, while others come from Africa, other parts of the Middle East and other areas.Roughly 30 percent of migrants were children in 2015 and 2016, including those unaccompanied by an adult, according to the European Commission.The European Commission reported that most migrants are trying to “escape from political oppression, war and poverty, as well as to reunite with family and benefit from entrepreneurship and education.” The latter group (those seeking entrepreneurship and education) is referred to “economic migrants.” This type of migrant is not eligible for asylum, according to the European Commission.Asylum seekers are people fleeing conflict or persecution and seeking protections outlined in the 1951 Refugee Convention on the Status of Refugees, which was ratified by 145 United Nations member states. A refugee is an asylum seeker whose asylum claim has already been approved.Where do the migrants arrive?Most of the migrants enter the EU in Greece and Italy, followed by Spain. An EU law, the 2013 Dublin Regulation, stipulates that migrants seeking refugee status must apply for asylum in the country where they first enter Europe and remain in that country for the asylum process. Under the law, the countries of arrival are legally responsible for reviewing the asylum claims, and either granting the claim or determining that migrants need to return to their countries of origin.Refugees who have been approved to live in the EU are sometimes relocated to member states other than their country of arrival. This decision is based in part on criteria established by the Dublin Regulation that determine when a country is receiving a disproportionate number of asylum applications based on its relative size and wealth.How many asylum seekers are coming to the EU?Migration to Europe reached its peak in 2015, with 1,015,078 migrants recorded as arriving in the EU to seek asylum this year, the majority of whom were smuggled from Turkey to Greece by sea. (These figures do not include migration from other EU member states or other types of legal migration.) The number of new migrants has declined since 2015. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 362,000 migrants crossed the Mediterranean Sea in 2016: 181,400 arrived in Italy and 173,450 in Greece.Last year, the total figure of migrants newly entering Europe was about 105,000. (See below for measures the EU has taken to reduce migration.) According to the European Migration Network, a total 709,200 asylum applications were filed in the EU plus Norway in 2017. This was 43 percent fewer than the previous year.From January to mid-September 2018, just over 76,000 migrants seeking asylum arrived in the EU, according to UNHCR figures.There are also estimated to be hundreds of thousands of undocumented migrants in Europe.What’s the problem?While the European Union maintains that it has a “legal and moral obligation” to protect asylum seekers who have a legitimate claim for protection, the increased migration has placed an economic burden on EU countries.  Between 2015 and 2017, the EU allocated about $20.6 billion (€17.7 billion) of its budget to address migration, including funding for projects outside of the EU and humanitarian aid. (The EU’s total annual budget in 2015 was $170.8 billion, or €145 billion.)Individual countries also spend large sums on the migrant situation, including on border improvement. For example, Germany spent about $26.7 billion (€23 billion) on migration in 2016, according to Johannes Singhammer, the vice president of the German parliament at the time.A EU member state can choose not to accept a refugee who has been granted asylum and whom it would otherwise need to accept under the Dublin Regulation. The country can instead choose to reallocate the migrant to another EU state, but this will cost the country money. In accordance with the regulation, the country is obligated to contribute €250,000 for each such applicant.Additionally, migrants go through dangerous and sometimes deadly situations to reach the EU. The European Commission reported that as much as 90 percent of migrants hired human smugglers. Thousands of migrants have died while trying to reach Europe by sea. In 2015, the year with the highest levels of migration, a recorded 3,771 migrants died or went missing while trying to reach Europe by sea, according to figures from the International Organization for Migration (IOM).Migrants who arrive and seek asylum are sometimes held in detention centers. Activist groups have accused some of these centers of violating the European Convention on Human Rights’ provisions that prohibit inhumane and degrading treatment.What has the EU done to address the situation?The EU has taken measures to try to address the migrant situation in multiple areas, within the union and outside of it.In May 2015, EU leaders drafted “A European Agenda on Migration,” which outlined commitments for EU countries to take certain numbers of refugees. It also outlined other projects, such as stopping human smugglers, increasing border security, and “simplifying” the asylum process.At sea, EU countries have increased the presence of ships in the Mediterranean to stop migrant trafficking networks and rescue migrants from drowning. Between 2015 and 2017, the EU caught 2,000 traffickers and 375 trafficking vessels, according to the European Commission. The EU has also deployed more border guards to the borders of member states.The EU’s agenda on migration has also included a plan to give development assistance to countries from which many of the migrants originate. For example, the EU is providing funding for self-employment opportunities in Niger aimed at reducing economic hardship that encourages migration through the Sahara to Europe.The EU, in 2015, also outlined temporary quotas for the number of refugees each member state must accept. Some member states, such as Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic refused to accept the quotas. Other states have not met their requirements. Have EU countries done anything else?Individual member countries have also created laws and policies to address migration. For example, in 2002, Italy passed a law that made illegal immigration and helping migrants enter the country illegally punishable by fines or jail time.Hungary passed an emergency measure in 2015 that had similar aims, then in 2018 passed a law that that made “facilitating illegal immigration,” punishable by a year in jail. Hungary has also termed asylum seekers “illegal immigrants,” and the law applies to them. The law, which affects non-governmental organization workers, also made the grounds for applying for asylum more restrictive. In 2015, 177,000 migrants sought asylum in Hungary, and the country accepted a few hundred of the applications.The U.N.’s Declaration of Universal Human Rights states, in Article 14(1), “Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.”

Italy summons French ambassador over Macron’s comments on migrant ship entry denial.
Italy’s foreign ministry summoned the French ambassador on Wednesday in response to French President Emmanuel Macron’s comments regarding Italy’s denying entry to a rescue ship carrying 629 migrants. Macron had  the day prior that Italy had acted with “cynicism and irresponsibility.” The Italian foreign ministry  Macron’s comments were “unacceptable,” and were “undermining relations between Italy and France.” Macron  the two countries should not “give in to emotions.”Also on Wednesday, Italy canceled a planned meeting between the country’s economy minister and France’s finance minister, with neither office providing a reason for the cancellation. The ministers later agreed to reschedule their meeting, according to a French finance ministry official cited by Reuters.Macron and Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte, who took office on June 1, are scheduled to meet Friday in Paris to discuss migration, among other topics. Italian news agency ANSA reported that the Macron-Conte meeting could be postponed; Conte’s office did not confirm the report. Italian Interior Minister Matteo Salvini , “If an official apology doesn't arrive [from France],” Conte “would be right not to go to France.” France  it had not received a formal request from Italy for an apology, and that it continued to plan for a Friday meeting between Macron and Conte, Reuters reported. Macron  France was “working hand in hand with Italy” on the issue of migration.Migration in EuropeMore than a million migrants have arrived in the European Union since 2015, most leaving the Syrian conflict and, according to the European Commission, up to 90 percent hired human smugglers. EU law stipulates that migrants seeking refugee status must apply for asylum in the country where they first enter Europe. The majority of migrants seeking asylum enter the EU through Italy or Greece. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 362,000 migrants crossed the Mediterranean Sea in 2016: 181,400 arrived in Italy and 173,450 in Greece. Last year, the total figure of migrants entering Europe was about 105,000. Italy also has an estimated 500,000 unregistered migrants, Reuters reported. So far this year, about 33,700 have arrived, according to UNHCR figures, and about 771 are suspected to have drowned. In May 2015, EU leaders drafted “A European Agenda on Migration,” which outlined commitments for EU countries to take certain numbers of refugees. It also outlined other projects to address migration, such as stopping human smugglers, increasing border security, “simplifying” the asylum process and providing development assistance to countries from which many of the migrants originate. In the 2015-2017 period, the EU allocated $20.3 billion (€17.7 billion) of its budget to address migration issues, including providing humanitarian aid.Salvini, who is also deputy premier and leader of the League party, alleged before the Italian Senate on Wednesday that France had received 640 migrants of the 9,816 migrants it  it would take under a 2015 EU relocation plan. Some countries have received the number of migrants they  they would under the plan, while others have not, according to The Associated Press.A meeting of EU leaders is scheduled for June 28-29 in Brussels, with migration as one item on the agenda. Last December, EU leaders set the end of June 2018 as a deadline for ruling on a mechanism to handle migrants.Migrant shipsOn Monday, Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez  his country would receive the 629 migrants aboard the Aquarius ship at Spain’s Valencia port, after Malta and Italy declined to allow the ship to dock. Italy  the ship’s passengers were not in danger and that other European countries should take the migrants.Filippo Grandi, the UNHCR high commissioner, , “Closing ports, whoever does it, threatens rescue at sea, as we have seen in the case of the Aquarius, and therefore is not the right solution.” He added that “the reason why Italy  it had closed ports is something we need to listen to.”The Aquarius, run by rescue group SOS Méditerranée, had rescued migrants from smaller boats in the Mediterranean off the coast of Libya on June 9. The Aquarius and two Italian naval ships escorting it are expected to arrive in Valencia on the night of June 16, weather conditions permitting, according to SOS Méditerranée co-founder Sophie Beau. On Wednesday, a separate Italian coast guard ship carrying more than 930 migrants docked in Sicily.Additionally, the U.S.S. Trenton rescued 41 migrants and recovered 12 bodies on Tuesday off the coast of Libya, during what is  was a routine operation. Sea Watch, a German non-governmental organization ship,  it had the resources to take those migrants if Italy agreed to open its ports to the Sea Watch.

Hungarian PM Viktor Orbán wins third term, coalition supermajority.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán was re-elected to a third term in the country’s general election on Sunday. Orbán’s Fidesz party and its smaller coalition partner, the Christian Democrat party, won at last 134 of the 199 seats in the parliament, according to preliminary results with 99 percent of the vote counted. That is enough for a two-thirds supermajority.Voter turnout was 69 percent, BBC reported. The Jobbik party, described as “nationalist” by AP and Reuters, won the second most seats at 25, according to preliminary results. Next was a coalition led by the Socialist party with 20 seats, followed by the Green Party in fourth place. Final election results are due by April 27. The prime minister did not hold any public debates with opponents or speak with independent media, BBC reported. He campaigned at rallies with supporters. Orbán’s party is described as “right-wing” and “nationalist” by media outlets. The prime minister ran on a platform to stop immigration, which he  would “slowly” overtake the country. In 2015, his government constructed a fence along the borders with Serbia and Croatia to deter illegal immigration. He also  he would reduce income taxes. Before the election, the government submitted a so-called “Stop Soros” group of bills to parliament, named after Hungarian-born U.S. investor George Soros, who donates to non-government organizations (NGOs) that support open immigration policies. The legislation would impose a 25 percent tax on foreign donations to selected Hungarian NGOs, and would require NGO work to be approved by the interior minister, who could deny permission on the basis of “national security.” A government spokesperson  the bills were designed to close “legal loopholes” used by NGOs that advocate for people seeking asylum. Orbán  last month that Soros was attempting to turn Hungary into “an immigrant country.” Soros has called Orbán’s comments “distortions and lies.” Orbán’s party won 85 of the 88 districts outside the capital city of Budapest, while left-wing parties won 12 of the 18 districts in the capital area,  Tamás Boros, co-director of the Belgian and Hungarian-based Policy Solutions think tank.Orbán first served as prime minister from 1998 to 2002, followed by two terms of Socialist party rule. Orban was re-elected as Prime Minister in 2010. His Fidesz party won supermajorities in 2010 and 2014, then lost the two-thirds majority during by-elections in 2015.

What is the European Union?.
The European Union (EU) is a body that currently includes 28 countries, known as member states. When a country joins the EU, its representatives agree to divert some of their decision-making powers to EU institutions. In exchange, countries receive benefits, including access to free trade.EU laws supercede laws of member states for areas in which the EU has jurisdiction, such as agriculture, fisheries and transport. The EU Commission can propose new laws that the Parliament and Council can decide to adopt. Then, member states and the EU Commission implement the new laws. EU citizens can also elect members of the Parliament, and qualifying member states can use the official EU currency, the “euro.” Brief EU historyThe EU was created in 1951, after World War II, and was aimed at preventing neighboring countries from going to war. The EU began with an alliance among Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. The participating members established trade agreements and removed customs duties. By the 1960s, member states also agreed to have joint control over food production to reduce supply shortages among EU citizens.Between 1973 and 2013, an additional 22 member states joined the union, with Croatia being the most recent country added. However, the U.K. is scheduled to leave the EU at 11 p.m. U.K. time on March 29, 2019, after voting in a referendum to exit the union in 2016. The U.K. would be the first country to leave the EU, though it could return at a later date if it still incorporated the union’s regulations and laws.The EuroThe EU has its own currency, the euro, which is used by 19 of the 28 member countries. The group of countries that use it is known as the “euro zone.” Countries such as the U.K. and Denmark didn’t adopt the euro. The EU also has a single marketplace in which all members can exchange goods and services without paying tariffs. EU member states must meet certain economic and legal standards known as the Maastricht criteria to be a part of the “euro zone.” The Maastricht criteria includes rules on inflation, budget deficits limits, national debt, interest rates and exchange rates.Citizens within the EU can move freely between member states.EU ParliamentThe EU Parliament has 751 MEPs, or Members of the European Parliament, elected directly by the citizens of EU member states every five years. The last election was held in 2014. MEPs elect a president for a renewable term of 2-1/2 years. The president represents EU Parliament internationally, oversees members’ work, and signs budgetary and legislative acts adopted by parliament.The parliament has three primary functions: 1) passing EU laws and deciding on other international agreements and legislation; 2) supervising EU institutions such as banks, and reviewing petitions or inquiries posed by its citizens; and 3) managing the union’s budget. The parliament also includes at least 20 committees that focus on specific issues, such as human rights, international trade, and transportation.MEPs are grouped by political affiliation, not by country. Parliament currently has MEPs representing nine political parties. With 218 MEPs, the European People’s Party (EPP) is the largest political group in parliament. According to parliamentary rules, no EU country can have fewer than six or more than 96 MEPs, and the total number cannot exceed 751, including the president.Treaty on European UnionThe Treaty on European Union, also called the Treaty of Maastricht, named for the Dutch city, forms the constitution of the EU and outlines principles of the union. Article 9, for example, says, “the Union shall observe the principle of the equality of its citizens, who shall receive equal attention from its institutions, bodies, offices and agencies.” Article 7 of the treaty was designed to prevent member states from enacting laws or policies that went against the democratic principles on which the EU was founded. The article allows parliament or the EU Commission to determine whether there is a “clear risk of a serious breach by a member state” of the values referred to in Article 2 of the treaty by questioning the member state and reviewing evidence against them. Article 2 values include: “human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities.”A member state and parliament can attempt to remedy any alleged breaches. If the member state is found to continue to not comply with EU values, it may have certain rights suspended, such as the ability to vote on EU laws in parliament.

What people are saying about the EU vote on Hungary.
The European Union Parliament voted 448 to 197 (with 48 abstentions) to initiate a review of whether Hungary had violated EU law for allegedly restricting the media, denying refugees equal rights and other actions. The vote could eventually lead to penalties or sanctions on Hungary. Not everyone agreed about the vote. Here’s a look at what leaders are saying:Hungary’s prime ministerHungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán alleged that the EU’s decision was a response to Hungary’s refusal to take in the number of refugees required by an EU-wide resettlement quota scheme. (Hungary has refused to take in refugees since the EU enacted temporary intake quotas in 2015.)Regarding his country’s decision to not take in the refugees, Orbán  in a January interview, “We don't see these people as Muslim refugees. We see them as Muslim invaders,” adding that Germany had wanted the migrants, but Hungary didn’t. “We believe that a large number of Muslims inevitably leads to parallel societies, because Christian and Muslim societies will never unite.” He called multiculturalism “only an illusion.”Hungary’s foreign affairs minister“The decision of the European Parliament on the adoption of the [report on Hungary’s alleged EU violations] is the petty revenge of the pro-immigration politicians,” Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Péter Szijjártó . He  Hungary would be “reviewing the available opportunities for legal redress.”Initiator of the voteEU Parliament member Judith Sargentini of the Netherlands issued a report listing Hungary’s alleged violations, which led to the vote on Hungary.  “Viktor Orban's government has been leading the charge against European values by silencing independent media, replacing critical judges, and putting academia on a leash,” Sargentini alleged in a letter. “Individuals close to the government have been enriching themselves, their friends and family members at the expense of Hungarian and European taxpayers.”“We stand up for the rights of all Europeans, including Hungarian citizens and we defend our European values,” Sargentini  of Wednesday’s vote. “Now it is up to the European leaders to take their responsibility and stop watching from the sidelines as the rule of law is destroyed in Hungary. This is unacceptable for a Union that is built on democracy, the rule of law and fundamental rights.”President of the European CommissionThe commission’s president, Jean-Claude Juncker, who is ineligible to vote with the Members of the European Parliament in accordance with EU rules,  via his spokesperson’s Twitter account, that he was “in harmony with today's decision.”“The European Commission is using the tools we have, launching infringement procedures against countries that don't respect EU law,” his spokesperson tweeted.Other criticism of HungaryAmnesty International's expert on human rights in the EU, Berber Biala-Hettinga,  the EU vote “made it clear that human rights, the rule of law and democratic values are not up for negotiation.”Other criticism of the EU’s actionSome politicians critical of the EU or centralized European government criticized the vote, such as British politician Nigel Farage, who led the campaign for the U.K. to leave the EU. “European Parliament votes to remove Hungary’s voting rights, the authoritarian grip of the EU gets even tighter,” Farage tweeted. Geert Wilders, leader of the Dutch Party for Freedom, tweeted, “Hungary is the example for all EU countries and Orban is a hero and deserves the Nobel Prize.”

Cluster #72: 29 stories
Trump says he’s ‘talking to’ North Korea after canceling planned summit with leader Kim (Update).
President Donald Trump  on Friday morning that he was “talking to” North Korea after the day before canceling a meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un planned for next month. “We’ll see what happens, it could even be the 12th,” Trump , referring to the June 12 date for which the summit was originally scheduled. In an open letter to Kim on Thursday, Trump canceled the planned meeting between the two leaders in Singapore next month, writing: “based on the tremendous anger and open hostility displayed in your most recent statement, I feel it is inappropriate, at this time, to have this long-planned meeting.” Earlier on Thursday, North Korea’s vice minister of foreign affairs called Vice President Mike Pence a “political dummy” after comments he made about North Korea on Monday.On Friday, in response to Trump’s cancellation, North Korea released a statement saying it was still “willing to give the U.S. time and opportunities” to reconsider talks “at any time, at any format.” Trump called the North’s statement “good news” in a tweet, adding, “will soon see where it will lead, hopefully to long and enduring prosperity and peace.” To reporters outside the White House on Friday morning, he , “everybody plays games.”Pence’s comments on MondayOn Monday, Pence spoke about North Korea on Fox News, referring to comments made by National Security Adviser John Bolton in April. At that time, Bolton spoke about North Korean nuclear disarmament, saying the U.S. had “in mind the Libya model from 2003, 2004.” In 2003, Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi agreed to denuclearization in exchange for sanctions being lifted. Rebels overthrew and killed Gadhafi in 2011. Prior to Gadhafi’s death, NATO forces carried out an airstrike on Gadhafi’s convoy, and later  they did not know he was in it.Last week, Trump , “the Libyan model isn’t a model that we have at all when we’re thinking of North Korea.” He , “In Libya we decimated that country,” adding, “There was no deal to keep Qaddafi.” Trump also , “That model would take place if we don’t make a deal [with North Korea], most likely.”Pence  on Fox News, "There was some talk about the Libya model. As the President made clear, this will only end like the Libya model ended if Kim Jong Un doesn't make a deal." When Fox News’ Martha MacCallum  some people may have taken Bolton's comments about the “Libya model” as a threat, Pence  "I think it's more of a fact." North Korea’s comments on ThursdayNorth Korea’s vice minister of foreign affairs Choe Sun Hui  Pence’s remarks comparing North Korea to Libya were “unbridled and imprudent.” She , "As a person involved in the U.S. affairs, I cannot suppress my surprise at such ignorant and stupid remarks gushing out from the mouth of the U.S. vice president.” Hui also , "Whether the U.S. will meet us at a meeting room or encounter us at nuclear-to-nuclear showdown is entirely dependent upon the decision and behavior of the United States.”Hui  the U.S. asked for the dialogue with North Korea and “now it is misleading the public opinion as if we have invited them to sit with us.” In his letter to Kim, Trump , “We were informed that the meeting was requested by North Korea, but that to us is totally irrelevant.”Trump’s letter on ThursdayTrump wrote that he had been “very much” looking forward to meeting with Kim. He , “the Singapore summit, for the good of both parties, but to the detriment of the world, will not take place."Trump thanked Kim for the release of three American hostages earlier this month, calling it a “beautiful gesture” and “very much appreciated.” Trump ended the letter to Kim, saying, “If you change your mind having to do with this most important summit, please do not hesitate to call me or write. The world, and North Korea in particular, has lost a great opportunity for lasting peace and great prosperity and wealth. This missed opportunity is a truly sad moment in history.”

Kim Jong Un visits Xi in China, says his country is ‘committed to denuclearization’ of Korean peninsula.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un made an unofficial visit to China from Sunday to Wednesday, according to Chinese state-run news outlet Xinhua. Kim met Chinese President Xi Jinping in Beijing in his first known visit abroad since taking power when his father, Kim Jong Il, died in 2011. Kim reportedly , "It is our consistent stand (sic) to be committed to denuclearization on the peninsula.” Kim plans to meet with South Korean President Moon Jae-in in April and U.S. President Donald Trump by May.Kim also , "The issue of denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula can be resolved, if South Korea and the United States respond to our efforts with goodwill, create an atmosphere of peace and stability while taking progressive and synchronous measures for the realization of peace." He did not specify the terms or conditions for “denuclearization,” or the actions his country would take to that end.Xi told Kim that the two countries’ "traditional friendship” is the “precious wealth of both sides." Xi made four “proposals” regarding relations between the two countries, according to Xinhua. These included: 1. “high-level” exchanges, such as visits and sending “special envoys and letters to each other”;2. strategic communications that would “strengthen … mutual trust”;3. “actively advanc[ing] peaceful development,” and 4. “cement[ing] the popular will foundation” for “friendship” between the countries, including through youth exchanges.Xi  “positive changes” had occurred on the Korean Peninsula this year, according to Xinhua. The outlet added that Xi  China’s goal is “denuclearization of the peninsula, safeguarding peace and stability” there, and “solving problems through dialogue and consultation.” According to Xinhua, Xi and Kim talked about “the situation of the world” in addition to that of the Korean Peninsula. Xi and Kim held some talks at the Great Hall of the People in Tiananmen Square. Afterwards, they attended a banquet with their wives, Peng Liyuan and Ri Sol-ju.North Korea’s state news agency, KCNA, reported that Kim , "It is appropriate that my first trip abroad is in China's capital, and my responsibility to consider continuing North Korea-China relations as valuable as life." Kim arrived in Beijing in an armored train.Chinese diplomat Yang Jiechi will visit Seoul on Thursday to inform South Korea about the content of the visit.KCNA  Kim invited Xi to visit North Korea sometime in the future, and Xi accepted the invitation with “great pleasure.”The Chinese Foreign Ministry released a statement by Kim in which he made the comment about being “committed to denuclearization on the peninsula.” He  this was “in accordance with the will of late President Kim Il Sung and late General Secretary Kim Jong Il.” In 2005, while Kim Jong Il was leader, North Korea agreed to stop its nuclear weapons development program during six-party talks in China. North Korea tested its first nuclear weapon in 2006. In 2009, it stopped participating in six-party talks.Last year, the U.N. Security Council passed three rounds of sanctions against North Korea in response to its missile and nuclear tests. North Korea’s last missile test was in November 2017, and its most recent nuclear weapons test was in September 2017. Last month, North Korea sent a delegation to the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, and agreed to talks with the country.US reaction to the meetingEarlier this month, Trump agreed to meet with Kim by May. Trump tweeted on Wednesday: “Received message last night from XI JINPING of China that his meeting with KIM JONG UN went very well and that KIM looks forward to his meeting with me. In the meantime, and unfortunately, maximum sanctions and pressure must be maintained at all cost!” Trump also tweeted that he was “looking forward” to his meeting with Kim.White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders  the U.S. was “cautiously optimistic,” and that it considered Kim’s first trip outside of his country a “positive sign that the maximum pressure campaign is continuing to work.”

North Korea shows ‘willingness’ to denuclearize without US troop withdrawal, Moon says.
On Thursday, South Korean President Moon Jae-in  North Korea had “expressed willingness” to give up its nuclear program without the condition of U.S. forces withdrawing from the Korean peninsula. Moon also  denuclearization based on troop withdrawal would be a “condition that the U.S. cannot accept.” Moon is scheduled to meet for peace talks with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un on April 29 in the demilitarized zone (DMZ) between the two countries.President Donald Trump is planning to meet with Kim in late May or early June, according to the White House. He  Wednesday, “If we don't think it's going to be successful, we won't have it. If the meeting when I'm there isn't fruitful, I will respectfully leave the meeting." He added, “I like always remaining flexible,” and, "we'll remain flexible here."

North Korea releases 3 American detainees during Pompeo visit.
North Korea released three Korean-American detainees on Wednesday after U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo met with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un for about 90 minutes. Pompeo was in North Korea to make arrangements for a Trump-Kim meeting, previously announced by the White House and planned for late May or early June. The three Americans flew with Pompeo to Japan and were scheduled to arrive at Andrews Air Force Base near Washington at 2 a.m. local time on Thursday. President Donald Trump also  on Wednesday he would announce the location of the meeting with Kim within three days, saying it would not be in the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea.“I am pleased to inform you that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo is in the air and on his way back from North Korea with the 3 wonderful gentlemen that everyone is looking so forward to meeting,” Trump tweeted. “They seem to be in good health. Also, good meeting with Kim Jong Un. Date  and Kim Dong-chul, a pastor. North Korean authorities detained Kim Hak-song in May 2017 on suspicion of “hostile acts,” Tony Kim in April 2017 for alleged espionage, and Kim Dong-chul in 2015 for alleged espionage. North Korean authorities had sentenced Kim Dong-chul to 10 years of hard labor. The men were able to walk onto the plane without assistance, according to the White House.South Korean spokesman Yoon Young-chan  the release of the Americans would have a “positive effect” on negotiations at the upcoming meeting between Trump and Kim. Yoon also called for the release of six South Koreans detained in North Korea.The North Korean official who  Kim had granted the mens’ release reportedly told Pompeo, “You should [take] care that they do not make the same mistake again. This was a hard decision,” according to Reuters.On Wednesday, the state-run North Korean news outlet , “The U.S. is persistently clinging to the hostile policy toward [North Korea], misleading the public opinion. Such behavior may result in endangering the security of its own country.”About 120,000 people are estimated to be imprisoned in North Korea without due process, according to the Committee for Human Rights in North Korea. These were the last of the American detainees, Reuters reported. Last year, North Korea released Otto Warmbier, 22, after holding him for 17 months. He was in a coma when released, and died within days.

South Korean delegation meets with Kim Jong Un in North Korea.
South Korean officials visiting the North Korean capital city of Pyongyang met with the North’s leader Kim Jong Un over dinner Monday night. North Korean state media reported that Kim expressed a “firm will” to “advance” north-south relations and “write a new history of national reunification.” The South Korean 10-person delegation extended an invitation to Kim from the South’s President Moon Jae-in to attend further talks. Both sides  there was a “satisfactory agreement” to hold future talks, according to BBC. Monday’s state dinner lasted approximately four hours, according to the South Korean government, and was also attended by Kim’s wife Ri Sol-ju and sister Kim Yo-jong.This was the first group of South Korean officials to meet with Kim since he took power in 2011 after his father’s death. The South’s delegation, which includes National Security Advisor Chung Eui-yong, intelligence chief Suh Hoon and Vice Unification Minister Chun Hae-sung, is scheduled to have another meeting with North Korean officials on Tuesday morning.Later this week, the delegation is scheduled to travel to the U.S. to brief officials on the outcome of the North-South talks. North Korea is currently under U.N. sanctions for its missile development and nuclear program. The U.S.  it is “cautiously optimistic” about improving relations between North and South Korea. President Donald Trump has  talks between Washington and North Korea are possible “under the right conditions.”  

Korean leaders commit to denuclearization, formal end to Korean War.
North and South Korea issued a declaration committing to denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and promising to formally end the Korean War. The declaration  the South’s President Moon Jae-in and the North’s leader Kim Jong-un “solemnly declared before the 80 million Korean people and the whole world that there will be no more war on the Korean Peninsula and thus a new era of peace has begun.” The leaders met in the demilitarized zone between the two countries on Friday, as each stepped hand-in-hand onto the North’s side of the line for a moment before proceeding to the South’s side for a welcoming ceremony and talks. After the meeting, the leaders issued a document called the “Panmunjeom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula.” The declaration  the two countries would “actively cooperate to establish a permanent and solid peace regime on the Korean Peninsula,” including ending the “unnatural state of armistice” that has existed since 1953, and would “actively pursue” joint talks with the U.S. or the U.S. and China this year to declare an official end to the Korean War.In addition to committing to peace, the document “confirmed the common goal of realizing, through complete denuclearization, a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula.” It , “measures being initiated by North Korea are very meaningful and crucial for the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.” The two countries also agreed to:	adhere to their Non-Aggression Agreement that “precludes the use of force in any form against each other,” and “to carry out disarmament in a phased manner.”	“improving and cultivating inter-Korean relations” such as through holding dialogues, “fully implementing all” existing agreements between the countries, jointly participating in sporting events, connecting and “moderniz[ing]” inter-Korea land transport routes and re-connecting relatives between the two countries;	“make joint efforts to alleviate the acute military tension and practically eliminate the danger of war on the Korean Peninsula,” including by establishing a “maritime peace zone,” holding “frequent meetings between military authorities” and ending “hostile acts” such as “broadcasting through loudspeakers” and distributing leaflets in the demilitarized zone by May 1.This meeting was the first time a North Korean leader had entered the South’s territory since the 1953 armistice. At the talks, Moon also agreed to visit the North’s capital city of Pyongyang in the fall.Events leading to the meetingOn April 21, North Korea  it would suspend its nuclear weapons tests, and its intermediate-range and intercontinental ballistic missile tests. The country is under U.N. sanctions for past tests, including a nuclear test in September and an intercontinental ballistic missile test in November of last year.Some countries have held talks with North Korea in the past to negotiate an end to its nuclear weapons program. In 2009, North Korea withdrew from “Six-Party Talks” that included South Korea, China, the United States, Japan and Russia. In February 2012, Kim agreed to suspend the North’s long-range missile and nuclear tests, as well as uranium enrichment, according to the U.S. State Department. In January 2013, North Korea  it planned to conduct long-range missile and nuclear tests again.US ResponseIn response to the Korean leaders’ meeting, White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders , “We are hopeful that talks will achieve progress toward a future of peace and prosperity for the entire Korean Peninsula.” She added, “We wish the Korean people well.” U.S. President Donald Trump is planning to meet with Kim in late May or early June, the White House has . Mike Pompeo, who was confirmed as secretary of state on Thursday, met with Kim over Easter weekend.

North Korean officials absent for Thursday meeting on remains repatriation.
North Korean officials did not show up at the border between North and South Korea on Thursday for discussions on American remains repatriations, according to U.S. and South Korean officials who spoke to The New York Times on condition of anonymity. After his meeting with North Korean officials last week, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo  the two sides scheduled a meeting in Panmunjom on July 12 that “could move by one day or two,” in which officials would discuss the repatriation of remains. North Korean officials did not call or provide an explanation for their absence, according to CNN. American military officials were present at Panmunjom Thursday, the Times reported. When a reporter asked Pompeo in Brussels on Thursday about the planned meeting, he did not answer. He  Gen. Kim Yong Chol, an official he met with in Pyongyang, “made a commitment” that North Korea intends to denuclearize.At President Donald Trump’s June 12 meeting in Singapore with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, the two agreed to the repatriation of U.S. soldiers’ remains from North Korea. Trump  last month at a rally in Minnesota that 200 U.S. service members’ remains had “been sent back.” U.S. military officials later  they had not received any remains.There are about 5,300 sets of remains in the North from U.S. service members who died during the Korean War, according to U.S. Defense Department estimates. Between 1996 and 2005, U.S. and North Korean workers recovered the remains of what were believed to be more than 220 American soldiers. The two sides suspended those efforts in 2005 as the North was developing nuclear weapons. Also on Thursday, Trump tweeted a letter he had received from Kim, calling it a “very nice note” and saying, “Great progress [is] being made!” In the letter, dated July 6, Kim thanked Trump for his “energetic and extraordinary efforts” made “for the improvement of relations between the two countries and the faithful implementation of the joint statement” they had signed in Singapore. Kim wrote, “I firmly believe that the strong will, sincere efforts and unique approach” of the two men “aimed at opening up a new future” between North Korea and the U.S. “will surely come to fruition.”

Kim Jong-un meets with Xi Jinping in second China visit.
North Korean leader Kim Jong-un visited President Xi Jinping in China on Monday and Tuesday to hold diplomatic talks. Kim flew to the Chinese city of Dalian and stayed for two days before returning to Pyongyang.Kim and Xi discussed relations between their two countries as well as “major issues of common concern,” and Kim restated Pyongyang’s willingness to forgo its nuclear arsenal. It was the second meeting between the two leaders in the last two months. They met for the first time in late March, during Kim’s first known trip abroad since becoming leader of North Korea in 2011.“It has been the DPRK’s (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea) consistent and clear stand to achieve denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,” Kim , according to China’s state news agency Xinhua. Kim also , “As long as relevant parties abolish their hostile policies and remove security threats against the DPRK, there is no need for the DPRK to be a nuclear state and denuclearization can be realized.”Xi , “China is willing to continue to work with all relevant parties and play an active role in comprehensively advancing the process of peaceful resolution of the peninsula issue through dialogue, and realizing long-term peace and stability in the region.”Kim told Xi the denuclearization of the peninsula was North Korea’s “constant and clear position,” and was quoted as saying, “I hope to build mutual trust with the U.S. through dialogue.”The meeting took place before a summit between Kim and U.S. President Donald Trump, who has  the date and location of the summit is fixed but has yet to make details public.According to the White House, Trump and Xi held a phone call on Tuesday morning in which they discussed developments on the Korean peninsula and Kim’s visit to China.     Trump and Xi agreed that sanctions on Pyongyang should be maintained until North Korea permanently dismantles its nuclear and missile programs, the White House .

Trump and Kim meet in Singapore.
President Donald Trump met with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in Singapore for nearly five hours on Tuesday. After the meeting, the two leaders released a statement saying Trump “committed to provide security guarantees” to North Korea, and Kim “reaffirmed his firm and unwavering commitment to complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”Trump and Kim first met one-on-one with translators for about 38 minutes. Then talks continued with other advisers present, including Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, national security adviser John Bolton and White House Chief of Staff John Kelly, before the leaders released the joint statement. The statement included four points:1. The U.S. and North Korea “commit to establish” new U.S.-North Korea “relations in accordance with the desire of the peoples of the two countries for peace and prosperity.”2. The U.S. and North Korea “will join their efforts to build a lasting and stable peace regime on the Korean Peninsula.”3. “Reaffirming the April 27, 2018 Panmunjom Declaration,” North Korea “commits to work toward complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”4. The U.S. and North Korea “commit to recovering POW/MIA remains, including the immediate repatriation of those already identified.”The statement also  the U.S. and North Korea commit to hold follow-up negotiations, led by Pompeo, and “a relevant high-level” North Korean official, “at the earliest possible date, to implement the outcomes” of the U.S.-North Korea summit.Trump’s and Kim’s face-to-face meeting was the first between a sitting U.S. president and a North Korean leader.Topics of discussionDuring a post-meeting press conference, Trump  he expected denuclearization to begin “very, very quickly,” adding that the process would be verified and would involve “having a lot of people in North Korea.” According to Trump, Kim told him North Korea was destroying a missile engine test site. He  Kim was “committed” to cease ballistic missile tests. Trump specified that sanctions will remain on North Korea while negotiations continue between the countries. He  U.S.-South Korea joint military exercises would not be restarted “unless and until we see the future negotiation is not going along like it should.” Trump  he wanted to get U.S. soldiers out of South Korea. “I want to bring our soldiers back home,” he . “But that's not part of the equation right now. At some point I hope it will be.” The U.S. has 32,000 soldiers in South Korea, according to Trump. In a later interview with ABC News, Trump  the U.S. would stop its military “war games” exercises in South Korea, which he called “provocative” and “expensive.” U.S. military command in South Korea  Tuesday it had “received no updated guidance on execution or cessation of training exercises.” After the meeting, Trump called South Korean President Moon Jae-in to brief him on the meeting. A spokesman for Moon  South Korea needed more information “to understand” Trump’s intentions regarding joint military exercises.Trump noted that during their meeting, he and Kim did not discuss removing American troops or nuclear weapons from South Korea.The president also  human rights were discussed during the meeting. There are an estimated 80,000 to 120,000 political prisoners in North Korea, according to The Associated Press.Trump  at the press conference he would “love to have” Kim at the White House, and that he thought Kim would “love to be there” at some future time. “I think he trusts me and I trust him,” Trump  about Kim. The president  he would be willing to visit North Korea “at the appropriate time.”During the ABC News interview, Trump  Kim told him that his father, Kim Jong Il, had withdrawn from previous agreements because he was “let down” by the U.S. Kim Jong Un took power after his father died in 2011. Kim  at the joint press conference he and Trump “decided to leave the past behind. The world will see a major change.” Kim called the meeting a “good prelude to peace.” Kim  before the meeting that it was “not easy to get here,” adding, “old prejudices and practices worked as obstacles” to working together. “But we overcame all of them, and we are here today.”

North, South Korean leaders hold unannounced meeting in DMZ.
On Saturday, South Korean President Moon Jae In and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un held an unannounced in-person meeting in the demilitarized zone (DMZ) between the two countries. The second meeting, following their first on April 27, was requested by Kim, according to The Korea Times. The leaders met from 3 to 5 p.m. in the village of Panmunjeom on the North Korean side of the DMZ. Moon and Kim “reached a satisfactory consensus on the matters discussed,” North Korea’s state news agency KCNA reported. After Sunday’s meeting, Moon  that Kim showed a “commitment to the complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula” and to “holding the Washington-Pyongyang summit,” which was originally scheduled for June 12 in Singapore. On Friday, President Donald Trump tweeted that the U.S. was having “productive talks” about “reinstating” the meeting after he canceled it on Thursday. Moon and Kim also agreed to hold an inter-Korea meeting on June 1. That meeting had been scheduled for May 16 and was suspended by North Korea on May 15, citing South Korea-U.S. joint military drills. The leaders also agreed to hold talks regarding reunions for families separated by the Korean War, The Korea Times reported. Also attending Saturday’s meeting were South Korean intelligence chief Suh Hoon and North Korean vice-chairman of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party, Kim Yong Chol.

North, South Korean leaders meet Friday.
South Korean President Moon Jae-in met North Korean leader Kim Jong-un on Friday, starting at 9:30 a.m. local time at the Panmunjom Military Demarcation Line in the demilitarized zone between the two countries. The leaders plan to meet at the South’s Peace House for talks, which are to include the topics of peace and denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, according to South Korean Chief of Staff Im Jong-seok, who heads the summit preparation committee.Former South Korean Presidents Kim Dae-jung and Roh Moo-hyun visited North Korea while in office. According to The Korea Times, no North Korean leader has visited South Korea since fighting in the Korean War ended in 1953. The countries signed an armistice at the time; they have not signed an official peace treaty. The agendaA welcoming ceremony is planned that would include an inspection of South Korea’s honor guard. The two delegations will have lunch separately before Moon and Kim plant a pine tree together. A monument with Moon and Kim’s signatures on it and the words “planting peace and prosperity” will be placed next to the tree. The two leaders will meet for dinner on the third floor of the Peace House after talks.The two leaders are then to sign an agreement and announce it. Im , “where and how the announcement will be made will depend on the content of the agreement.” Im also , “I think the summit will be considered successful if we can clearly put into words North Korea’s clear intention to denuclearize.”The delegationsKim’s delegation is to include his sister, Kim Yo-jong; the North Korean ceremonial head of state, Kim Yong-nam; Foreign Minister Ri Yong-ho; Minister of the People’s Armed Forces Pak Yong-sik; Chief of the General Staff of the Korean People’s Army Ri Myong-su; and Chairman of North Korea’s Committee for Peaceful Reunification Ri Son-gwon. Kim’s wife, Ri Sol-ju, has not been confirmed as attending, according to Im.Moon’s delegation is to include Im; South Korean National Security Office Chief Chung Eui-yong; National Intelligence Service Director Suh Hoon; Unification Minister Cho Myoung-gyon; Defense Minister Song Yong-moo; Foreign Minister Kang Kyung-wha; and Chief of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Jeong Kyeong-doo.Events leading to the meetingOn Saturday, North Korea  it would suspend its nuclear weapons tests, and its intermediate-range and intercontinental ballistic missile tests. The country is under U.N. sanctions for past tests, including a nuclear test in September and an intercontinental ballistic missile test in November of last year. Some countries have held talks with North Korea in the past to negotiate an end to its nuclear weapons program. In 2009, North Korea withdrew from “Six-Party Talks” that included South Korea, China, the United States, Japan and Russia. In February 2012, Kim agreed to suspend the North’s long-range missile and nuclear tests, as well as uranium enrichment, according to the U.S. State Department. In January 2013, North Korea  it planned to conduct long-range missile and nuclear tests again.After the meetingPresident Donald Trump is scheduled to meet with Kim in late May or early June, according to the White House. Mike Pompeo, confirmed Thursday as secretary of state, met with Kim over Easter weekend.

North Korea suspends Wednesday meeting with South over military drills.
Early Wednesday morning local time, North Korea suspended talks with South Korea that were scheduled for later that day, citing South Korea-U.S. joint military drills. The North Korean state-run Central News Agency (KCNA) called the drills a “provocation” and alleged they were a preparation for an invasion of North Korea, South Korean news agency Yonhap reported. In March, the U.S.  it would conduct the joint military drills with South Korea as it has done in previous years.KCNA also  the U.S. would have to “undertake careful deliberations about the fate” of the planned meeting between North Korean leader Kim Jong Un and U.S. President Donald Trump “in light of this provocative military” drill. That meeting is scheduled for June 12 in Singapore. U.S. State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert , “We have not heard anything” from the North and South Korea governments to “indicate that we would not continue conducting these [joint military] exercises or that we would not continue planning for our meeting between President Trump and Kim Jong Un next month.”Wednesday’s meeting between the Koreas was to be a follow-up to the April 27 meeting between Kim and South Korean President Moon Jae-in. Following that meeting, the two leaders issued a document called the “Panmunjom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula.” That document announced the countries had agreed to work towards the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and a formal close to the Korean War that ended in an armistice in 1953. Wednesday’s meeting had been scheduled to discuss these goals.KCNA , according to Yonhap, that the military exercise in South Korea “is a flagrant challenge to the Panmunjom Declaration and an intentional military provocation running counter to the positive political development on the Korean Peninsula.” The U.S. and South Koreans began conducting air combat drills with U.S. stealth fighters and B-52 bombers last Friday for a period scheduled to last for two weeks.

Trump confirms that CIA Director Mike Pompeo met with North Korea’s Kim Jong Un.
President Donald Trump confirmed on Wednesday that CIA Director Mike Pompeo met with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in preparation for a planned meeting between Trump and Kim. Trump’s confirmation followed news reports about the meeting on Tuesday. The president nominated Pompeo to replace Rex Tillerson as secretary of state, after Tillerson’s resignation was announced last month. Pompeo is currently participating in confirmation hearings with a senate committee.“Mike Pompeo met with Kim Jong Un in North Korea last week,” Trump tweeted Wednesday. On Tuesday, The Washington Post first reported the meeting took place, saying it occurred over Easter weekend, March 31 to April 1. White House officials confirmed on Wednesday that Pompeo met with Kim over the Easter weekend, AP reported.In Trump’s tweet about Pompeo in North Korea, he , “Meeting went very smoothly and a good relationship was formed. Details of Summit are being worked out now. Denuclearization will be a great thing for World, but also for North Korea!” Trump tweeted while in Florida meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.The White House  Trump’s meeting with Kim Jong Un would likely happen in the second half of May or first half of June, somewhere in Europe or Asia. On Tuesday, Trump , “it’s possible things won’t go well and we won’t have the meetings.” Trump would be the first sitting U.S. president to meet with a leader of North Korea since the Korean War. Pompeo’s meeting with Kim was the highest level meeting between a North Korean leader and an American official since 2000, when then-Secretary of State Madeleine Albright met with Kim Jong-Il, who was Kim Jong Un’s father.Chinese foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying  Wednesday that China hopes the U.S. and North Korea will work towards a political resolution to the situation between North and South Korea, who are technically still at war after a cease-fire marked the end of fighting in the Korean War of 1950 to 1953. North Korea is also currently under U.N. sanctions for its nuclear and ballistic missile test programs.Kim is scheduled to meet with South Korean President Moon Jae-in in the demilitarized zone between the two countries on April 27.Pompeo’s secretary of state confirmation hearingsDuring a confirmation hearing with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee last week, Pompeo  meetings with North Korea could lead to a possible comprehensive agreement on denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. “I’m optimistic that the United States government can set the conditions for that appropriately so that the president and the North Korean leader can have that conversation and will set us down the course of achieving a diplomatic outcome that America and the world so desperately need,” Pompeo . The Senate Foreign Relations Committee will be the first to vote on Pompeo’s nomination for secretary of state. Republicans have an 11-10 majority on the committee. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) has  he will vote against Pompeo’s confirmation. If the committee does not vote in Pompeo’s favor, his nomination could be sent to the full Senate with a recommendation from the committee against confirmation.Republicans hold a 51-49 majority in the full Senate, though Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) is away from the senate for health reasons, leaving Republicans with 50 to 49 seats. If Paul votes against Pompeo, at least one Democrat would have to vote yes to confirm him in a vote of the full Senate. When Pompeo was confirmed as director of the CIA in January of last year, 14 Democrats voted in his favor. At least three of those Democrats, Sens. Dianne Feinstein (Calif.), Jeanne Shaheen (N.H.) and Tim Kaine (Va.),  they would not vote for him for the position of secretary of state. On Wednesday, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker (R-Tenn.)  he expects a full Senate vote on Pompeo could happen next week.

North, South Korea announce family reunions in August.
On Friday, North and South Korea jointly announced they will hold a reunion event in August for 200 family members separated by the 1950-53 Korean War. Each country will send 100 people to a resort in Mount Kumgang, or "Diamond Mountain," in North Korea during August, according to South Korea’s Unification Ministry. The nonprofit organization Red Cross will organize the family reunions. "The reunion will be held from August 20 to 26, and 100 participants will be selected from each side," a joint statement from the Koreas , after officials met at the Mount Kumgang resort.The reunions are part of a program the Koreas established in 2000; initially events were held annually, and later decreased. The last reunion was in October 2015, and involved 650 South Koreans visiting relatives in the North. There are 57,000 people registered with the the South Korean Red Cross as being separated from family members. During the Korean War, millions of Koreans were separated from family members on the other sides of the border, BBC reported, some of whom have since passed away. The participants from South Korea are selected at random after taking into account age and family background, according to BBC. They will also be subject to medical exams to assess fitness for travel. North Korean leader Kim Jong Un agreed to the family reunions during meetings with South Korean President Moon Jae-in in May and U.S. President Donald Trump earlier this month.In a separate announcement on Friday, Trump signed a declaration to continue pre-existing economic restrictions and sanctions on North Korea, including freezing assets subject to U.S. jurisdiction. The sanctions were implemented under George W. Bush, and were continued and modified under the Obama and Trump administrations. “The existence and risk of proliferation of weapons-usable fissile material on the Korean Peninsula [and] the actions and policies of the Government of North Korea . . . continue to constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States,”  a notice Trump sent to Congress.

North Korea agrees to close nuclear test site, pending US actions.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un agreed on Wednesday to permanently shut down an engine test site and missile launch pad at the Dongchang-ri base, also known as Sohae Satellite Launching Station, on the country’s west coast. He also agreed to permanently dismantle North Korea’s Yongbyon nuclear facility “contingent upon corresponding measures by the United States,” South Korean President Moon Jae-in  in a statement. Moon made the announcement after the two leaders met in North Korea’s capital, Pyongyang, to discuss implementation of the Panmunjom declaration that both countries agreed to in April of this year. The declaration included a commitment to denuclearize the Korean peninsula and strengthen inter-Korean diplomacy. While the leaders didn’t specify the measures they want the U.S. to take in order for North Korea to dismantle the nuclear facility, Moon  the Koreas would “closely consult and cooperate with the United States and the international community” as they denuclearize the peninsula.When asked about the “corresponding measures,” President Donald Trump , “We’ll see what he’s looking at. We’ll see. But in the meantime, we’re talking. It’s very calm. He’s calm; I’m calm. So we’ll see what happens.”Kim promised to allow international inspectors to monitor the closing of the Dongchang-ri missile test site and launch pad, The Associated Press reported. Wednesday’s announcement did not include a timetable for the dismantlement of the country’s missile facilities, and didn’t say how many facilities and launch sites North Korea has or plans to dismantle.Moon  the two leaders also agreed to establish an inter-Korean military committee “to enable constant consultations on implementing military-related agreements.” Moon also noted that the two countries would work to reconnect railroads and roads on their eastern and western coastal regions within the year, increase tourism at North Korea’s Geumgang Mountain, and restore the Geumgang reunion center to facilitate video conference reunions among inter-Korean families.The Koreas also plan to bid to jointly host the 2032 Summer Olympics.

Trump agrees to meet with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un by May.
On Thursday, South Korean national security adviser Chung Eui-Yong announced that U.S. President Donald Trump  he would meet with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un by May. White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders  in a statement that Trump would “accept the invitation to meet with Kim Jong Un at a place and time to be determined.” “We look forward to the denuclearization of North Korea. In the meantime, all sanctions and maximum pressure must remain,” Sanders .Chung reported that Kim  he is “committed to denuclearization” and  North Korea would “refrain from any further nuclear or missile tests.” Kim  he was aware that joint military exercises between the U.S. and South Korea will be held later this year, Chung added, and that Kim “expressed his eagerness to meet President Trump as soon as possible.” Trump would be the first sitting president to meet with a leader of North Korea, according to CNN. The last meeting between the U.S. and North Korea was in 2009 as part of the six-party talks that also included South Korea, Japan, Russia and China. North Korea left in the middle of those talks.

Trump to meet Kim Jong Un in Singapore on June 12.
On Thursday, President Donald Trump tweeted that his meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un is planned for June 12 in Singapore. Trump , “We will both try to make it a very special moment for World Peace!” Earlier on Thursday, Trump met three Americans who were released from North Korea yesterday and had arrived at Andrews Air Force Base near Washington. Trump  it was a “special night for these really great people.”After they arrived, one of the former detainees, Kim Dong-chul, , “we are very, very happy. We were treated in many different ways. For me, I had to do a lot of labor. But when I got sick I was also treated by them.” Kim Dong-chul is a Korean-American pastor who was sentenced in North Korea to 10 years of hard labor for alleged espionage. The three former detainees had released a statement earlier expressing “deep appreciation” to Trump, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and the people and government of the U.S. for their return.

Trump, Xi hold phone call on North Korea.
U.S. President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke on the phone about North Korea on Saturday. The White House released a statement after the call, saying that Trump and Xi “agreed North Korea must stop its provocative and escalatory behavior.” The White House added that the two leaders “reiterated their mutual commitment to denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”According to state-run China Central Television, Xi  to Trump, “relevant parties must maintain restraint and avoid words and deeds that would exacerbate the tension on the Korean Peninsula.” Xi  the parties involved should try to resolve the situation through dialogue and negotiation for a political solution, according to Chinese news agency Xinhua. On Friday, the day before the call, Trump tweeted, “Military solutions are now fully in place, locked and loaded, should North Korea act unwisely. Hopefully Kim Jong Un will find another path!”Trump is scheduled to make his first state visit to China later this year.(

Trump says ‘nothing has changed’ on planned meeting with North Korean leader.
On Thursday, President Donald Trump spoke about his planned June 12 meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, saying, "Nothing has changed on North Korea that we know of.” He added, “If [the meeting] doesn’t take place, that’s fine, and if it does take place, I think some tremendous things can happen.” Trump’s comments came after North Korea suspended talks with South Korea on Wednesday.When North Korea suspended talks with the South on denuclearization and a formal close to the 1950-1953 Korean War, it described joint military exercises the U.S. and South Korea had scheduled for that day as a “provocation” and a preparation for an invasion of the North. South Korea  the exercises were not an “attack drill.” The U.S. and South Korea have conducted the drills every year for about the past decade.Trump  of the North Korea meeting preparations: “North Korea is actually talking to us about times and everything else as though nothing happened.” He made his comments during a meeting at the White House with NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg.North Korea  Wednesday it was not interested in a “one-sided” meeting with the U.S. that would have the North “abandon” its nuclear weapons program. North Korean Vice Foreign Minister Kim Gye Gwan  the “world knows too well that our country is neither Libya nor Iraq, which have met a miserable fate.” In 2003, Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi agreed to denuclearization in exchange for sanctions being lifted. Rebels overthrew and killed Gadhafi in 2011. National Security Adviser John Bolton  in April that the U.S. had “in mind the Libya model from 2003, 2004” in regards to North Korean nuclear disarmament. Trump , "the Libyan model isn't a model that we have at all when we're thinking of North Korea.” He , “In Libya we decimated that country,” adding, "There was no deal to keep Qaddafi." Trump also , “That model would take place if we don't make a deal [with North Korea], most likely.”Trump  if North Korea agreed to denuclearize, Kim would “get protections that would be very strong." He  it would be “something where [Kim would] be there, he'd be in his country, he'd be running his country. His country would be very rich.”Trump added he is "willing to do a lot" to provide security assurances to Kim. "The best thing he could do is make a deal."

South Korea proposes talks with North Korea about participation in Olympic Games.
On Tuesday, South Korea’s unification minister, Cho Myoung-gyon, proposed talks between North and South Korea about the North’s possible participation in next month’s Winter Olympic Games, which are scheduled to take place in the South Korean city of Pyeongchang. In a televised press conference, Myoung-gyon suggested the two countries meet on Jan. 9 in Panmunjom, a village on the border between the two countries, to discuss Olympic cooperation and how to improve overall ties between the two countries.On Monday, North Korean leader Kim Jong Un  in his New Year’s address he was willing to send a delegation to the Games. The country has participated in Olympic Games before, though not in Games hosted by South Korea. North Korea has yet to officially respond to Tuesday’s proposal from Myoung-gyon. If the talks happen, they would be the first official talks between North and South Korea since Dec. 2015.Kim Jong Un also  in Monday’s address that he was “open to dialogue” with the South and asked his neighbors to cease their annual military exercises with the United States. He also commented on the North’s advancements last year in its nuclear program, saying he has a “nuclear button” on his office desk, according to The Associated Press.

Pompeo says 2-day North Korea visit ‘productive’; North mentions ‘distrust’.
On Saturday, U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo  his two days of talks with North Korean officials were “productive” and that “progress” was made on “almost all the central issues.” Later in the day, North Korea issued a statement through its state-run KCNA news agency that  “The issues the U.S. side insisted on at the talks are all roots of troubles, which the previous administrations also had insisted on to disrupt the dialogue processes, stoke the distrust and increase the danger of war.”During his visit, Pompeo met with Gen. Kim Yong Chol, the vice chairman of the country's Party Central Committee. After a meeting of about three hours on Friday, Kim Yong Chol  there were aspects to “clarify,” and Pompeo , “There are things that I have to clarify as well.” Pompeo did not meet with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert  Pompeo was “very firm” in pursuing three goals during the visit: the complete denuclearization of North Korea, security assurances and the repatriation of the remains of soldiers killed in the Korean War.Nauert  Pompeo left Kim a letter from President Donald Trump. The North Korean statement  Pompeo had also been given a letter from Kim to Trump.Nauert also  Pompeo called Washington on Saturday morning to update the president, White House Chief of Staff John F. Kelly and national security adviser John Bolton on the talks.Joining Pompeo on his trip were other officials from the State Department, as well as from the National Security Council and the CIA. On Saturday, Pompeo left North Korea for Tokyo, where he briefed Japanese and South Korean officials on the talks on Sunday.Pompeo’s comments after the meetingsBefore leaving Pyongyang for Tokyo, Pompeo told reporters, "We had many hours of productive conversations. These are complicated issues, but we've made progress on almost all the central issues. Some places, a great deal of progress. Other places, there's still more work to be done." When asked whether he raised the subject of satellite images possibly showing North Korean nuclear facility expansions, Pompeo , "‎We talked about what the North Koreans are continuing to do and how it's the case we can get our arms around achieving what Chairman Kim and President Trump both agreed to, which was the complete denuclearization of North Korea." He added, “They’re still equally committed. Chairman Kim is still committed [to denuclearization].”Pompeo also  the two sides had discussed “what the modalities would look like” for the destruction of the North Korean missile engine testing facility, and  there was “some progress there as well.” He , “we have laid out a path for further negotiations at the working level so that the two teams can get together and continue these discussions.” Nauert  the two countries agreed to set up working groups in the future to discuss the “nitty-gritty stuff,” including how the U.S. would verify North Korean efforts to denuclearize.At Trump and Kim’s June 12 meeting in Singapore, they agreed to the repatriation of U.S. soldiers’ remains from North Korea. Trump  last month at a rally in Minnesota that 200 U.S. service members’ remains had “been sent back.” U.S. military officials later  they had not received any remains.Pompeo  the two sides set up a meeting in Panmunjom for July 12 that “could move by one day or two,” in which officials would discuss the repatriation of remains at the border, and that the “process will begin to develop over the days that follow.” He added that it was a “very productive conversation about the process by which we will deliver on the commitments that were made in the Singapore summit.”North Korea’s statementThe North Korean statement , “the U.S. side came up only with its unilateral and gangster-like demand for denuclearization just calling for [complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization] … all of which run counter to the spirit of the Singapore summit meeting and talks.” The statement added, “We expected the U.S. to bring constructive measures to build confidence in accordance with the spirit of the U.S.-North Korea Summit.”The statement  that “a shorter way to denuclearization on the Korean peninsula is to remove deep-rooted mistrust” and “follow the principle of simultaneous actions in resolving what is feasible one by one while giving priority to creating trust.”The statement  the U.S.’ suspension of joint military exercises with South Korea was “highly reversible” and could be “resumed anytime at any moment as all of its military force remains intact in its previously-held positions.” It added that “this is incomparable with the irreversible step taken by the DPRK to explode and dismantle the nuclear test ground.”The North Korean “side, during the talks, put forward the constructive proposals to seek a balanced implementation of all the provisions of the Joint Statement [from Singapore] out of its firm willingness to remain faithful to the implementation of the spirit and agreed points of the DPRK-U.S. summit meeting and talks,” the statement read.It continued, “These include taking wide-ranging proactive steps of simultaneous actions in a respective manner such as realizing multilateral exchanges for improved relations between” North Korea and the U.S.; “making public a declaration on the end of [the Korean] war … to build a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula; dismantling the test ground of high thrust engine[s] to make a physical verification of the suspension of ICBM production as part of denuclearization steps”; and “making an earliest start of the working-level talks for recovering POW/MIA remains.”The North’s statement , “The U.S. side never mentioned the issue of establishing a peace regime on the Korean peninsula which is essential for defusing tension and preventing a war.”The statement also read, “We still cherish our good faith in President Trump.”The White House declined to comment on North Korea’s statement, according to CNN.On Sunday in Tokyo, Pompeo , "If those [disarmament] requests were gangster-like, the world is a gangster, because there was a unanimous decision at the UN Security Council about what needs to be achieved.” He also , “Sanctions will remain in place until final, fully verified denuclearisation as agreed to by Chairman Kim occurs.”

North Korea says it conducted nuclear test for ballistic missile.
North Korea  it conducted its sixth nuclear test on Sunday afternoon, and state media called it a “complete success of a hydrogen warhead for an ICBM.” South Korea’s Joint Chiefs of Staff reported it detected an artificial earthquake with a 5.7 magnitude at about 12:29 p.m., coming from North Korea’s test site in Punggye-ri in North Hamgyong Province. The U.S. Geological Survey and Chinese government measured the tremor at a magnitude of 6.3.South Korea’s meteorological agency  the explosion was as much as six times bigger than North Korea’s last nuclear test, which took place on Sept. 9, 2016. The 2016 test caused a 5.3 magnitude artificial earthquake. International ResponseSouth Korean President Moon Jae-in held a National Security Council meeting at 1:30 p.m. local time. He  the nuclear test was an “absurd tactical mistake” and that “diplomatic and security ministries should work with the international community to draw up measures to prompt North Korea to give up its nuclear missile program in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.” South Korean officials also reportedly discussed the matter with their U.S. and Japanese counterparts.U.S. President Donald Trump posted on Twitter, stating that North Korea’s “words and actions continue to be very hostile and dangerous to the United States.”Japan sent specialized planes to try to detect and measure radiation levels, and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe  the test was “absolutely unacceptable.” He also called for an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council.China’s foreign ministry , “The Chinese government resolutely opposes and strongly condemns this.

North Korea suspends nuclear weapons and missile testing, state media reports.
North Korea  it would suspend its nuclear weapons and long-range missile testing as of Saturday, state media reported on Friday. State-run media outlet Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) reported that the decision was made so the North could focus on creating the “optimal international environment” to build its economy.The decision was reportedly made at a full meeting of the Korean Workers’ Party Central Committee. “To secure transparency on the suspension of nuclear tests, we will close the republic’s northern nuclear test site,” the party’s resolution .“Nuclear development has proceeded scientifically and in due order and the development of the delivery strike means also proceeded scientifically and verified the completion of nuclear weapons. … We no longer need any nuclear test or test launches of intermediate and intercontinental range ballistic missiles and because of this the northern nuclear test site has finished its mission,” leader Kim Jong Un is reported as saying on KCNA.Kim is scheduled to meet with South Korean President Moon Jae-in on April 29. Kim also plans to meet with President Donald Trump in May or June.A White House official told CNN that Trump is aware of the development, and that the administration would assess the situation before commenting. 

US, South Korean response following North Korean nuclear test.
The following has happened since North Korea’s sixth nuclear test on Sunday:	U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Nikki Haley  her country wants the U.N. Security Council to vote on new sanctions against North Korea next Monday.	South Korea simulated a missile attack on a North Korea nuclear site.	The U.S. and South Korea agreed to remove a 500 kg limit on South Korean missile payloads.More details:	South Korea launched missiles from aircraft and land into the Sea of Japan during live-fire drills on Monday. The drills took into account the distance to a North Korean nuclear site, according to Seoul’s Joint Chiefs of Staff.	South Korean Defense Minister Song Young-moo , “The redeployment of tactical nuclear weapons [to South Korea] is an alternative worth a full review.” Later, a spokesman for President Moon Jae-in , “Our government’s firm stance on the nuclear-free peninsula remains unchanged.”	Chinese Ambassador to the U.N. Liu Jieyi , "The peninsula issue must be resolved peacefully,” and, “China will never allow...war on the peninsula."	German chancellor Angela Merkel  she would request stricter EU sanctions against North Korea.	U.S. President Donald Trump tweeted on Sunday that “The United States is considering, in addition to other options, stopping all trade with any country doing business with North Korea.”

An overview of past North Korean nuclear agreements.
North Korea, South Korea and the U.S. are pursuing negotiations to denuclearize the Korean peninsula, but it’s not the first time. North Korea has previously entered into and, in the past, broken agreements to limit or end its nuclear program. Here is an overview:1985: North Korea agrees to Nuclear Non-proliferation TreatyIn 1985, North Korea signed the United Nations’ Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which is intended to “prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology.” The agreement, which called on signatories to pursue nuclear disarmament, allowed 18 months for the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to complete an assessment of the North’s nuclear facilities and other inspections and safeguards. North Korea did not complete the IAEA assessment.In 1993, the North announced plans to withdraw from the NPT, but the decision was suspended after discussions with the U.S. Then in 2003, North Korea formally withdrew from the NPT.1992: Agreement between North and South KoreaIn January 1992, North and South Korea signed the South-North Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. The countries agreed not to “test, manufacture, produce, receive, possess, store, deploy or use nuclear weapons” or to “possess nuclear reprocessing and uranium enrichment facilities.” The agreement included a stipulation for verification through mutual inspections, and the countries established a joint nuclear commission as a mechanism for implementing the agreement. However, negotiations were unsuccessful in reaching an agreement on reciprocal inspections. While the joint declaration was still technically in force, the commission became inactive in 1993.In 2002, North Korea  it had been secretly running a uranium enrichment program, which South Korea, Japan and the U.S.  violated the South-North Joint Declaration. 1992: The Safeguards Agreement with the IAEAIn April 1992, North Korea signed the Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA, set up by the NPT. The following year, initial IAEA inspectors alleged North Korea’s reporting showed discrepancies, and the North stopped allowing the IAEA to inspect its nuclear facilities. 1994: The U.S.-DPRK Agreed FrameworkIn 1994, the U.S. proposed a new agreement with North Korea, as part of an effort to keep North Korea in the NPT. The countries signed the US-DPRK Agreed Framework, named after the North’s formal name (the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea). Under the agreement, in exchange for U.S.-organized aid and fuel shipments, North Korea committed to stopping its plutonium weapons program, as well as to remaining in the NPT and allowing IAEA inspections. In the agreement, the North also sought “formal assurances” that the U.S. would not use nuclear weapons against it.  In 1998, North Korea violated the agreement’s provisions with a missile test. The U.S. conducted a policy review and recommended additional agreements. A new U.S. administration took office in 2001, before the recommendation was implemented.In October 2001, the U.S. reported that the North violated the agreement by secretly enriching uranium; North Korea denied this. The U.S. then suspended the fuel shipments to the North. The U.S. also failed to complete conditions of the agreement, such as announcing in 2003 that it would stop a project to build light-water reactors, which are used in generating nuclear energy. The conditions of the agreement were never fully realized.2002: North Korea-Japan Pyongyang DeclarationNorth Korea agreed to suspend missile testing in 2003 and afterwards as part of the Japan-DPRK Pyongyang Declaration. Both North Korea and Japan also agreed to adhere to international agreements on nuclear development. The agreement is violated with the North’s withdrawal from the NPT and subsequent missile tests.2003 to 2007: The Six-Party TalksBetween 2003 and 2007, China, Japan, North Korea, Russia, South Korea and the U.S. held a series of negotiations on denuclearizing the North. The first, second and third talks resulted in various statements, but did not result in any joint agreements among all parties. During the negotiations, North Korea  it would accept a “freeze for compensation” agreement. Then in February 2005, North Korea  it possessed nuclear weapons and would not attend future talks, citing the U.S. Secretary of State’s comment that North Korea was an “outpost of tyranny.” After the U.S. changed its lead negotiator, North Korea joined the U.S. for a fourth round of talks later that year. The parties released a Joint Statement of the Fourth Round of the Six-Party Talks that affirmed the North’s commitment to end all nuclear weapons development and to return to the NPT, abiding by IAEA safeguards, in exchange for aid, investment and powerelectricity. A further round of talks in 2007 outlined specific plans and dates for the implementation of the 2005 agreement. However, in 2009 North Korea launched a missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead, and the U.N. condemned the actions. The North announced it would “not be bound by any agreement reached at the talks.”2012: The Leap Day DealThe U.S. and North Korea engaged in secret in 2011. Its leader Kim Jong-il died in December 2011 and was replaced by his son Kim Jong-un, who initially agreed to terms agreed to during his father’s leadership. On February 29, 2012, North Korea agreed to the Leap Day Deal, under which it committed to stop long-range missile and nuclear activities in exchange for food aid.Yet in April, North Korea launched an “earth observation satellite” in violation of a U.N. resolution, and the U.S. suspended commitments under the Leap Day Deal. Then in May, the North amended its constitution and referred to itself as a “nuclear-armed state.”2018: Panmunjom DeclarationIn April 2018, North and South Korea committed to the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and promised to formally end the Korean War, issuing the “Panmunjom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula.” The document “confirmed the common goal of realizing, through complete denuclearization, a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula.” The countries agreed to meet again to continue discussions. In July, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un met with U.S. President Donald Trump at a summit, and they released a joint statement. It included that the North “reaffirmed” its commitment to the Panmunjom Declaration and the “firm and unwavering commitment to complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.” In September, after a meeting with South Korea, North Korea agreed to permanently shut down an engine test site and missile launch pad in Dongchang-ri and to permanently dismantle the Yongbyon nuclear facility “contingent upon corresponding measures” by the U.S., without stating what the measures needed to be. 

A timeline of North Korea’s missile development.
Given the ongoing news of North Korea’s plans to dismantle its nuclear facilities and to stop testing missiles, information about the country’s nuclear and missile capabilities may be useful. We’ve compiled a timeline of the North’s missile and nuclear-weapon development from 1981 to 2018.1981: North Korea and Egypt agree to a ballistic missile development deal. Egypt transfers Russian-built “Scud-B” missiles and “MAZ 543 transporter-erector-launchers (TEL)” to North Korea.1983: Iranian Prime Minister Ruhollah Musavi and Defense Minister Colonel Mohammad Salimi arrange to finance North Korea’s “Scud-B” development program in exchange for the ability to purchase production models.1984: North Korea successfully tests its first “Scud-B” missile.1985: North Korea signs the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The treaty is intended to “prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology,” according to the U.N. Office for Disarmament Affairs.1987: Scud-B production facilities capable of producing 50 missiles annually are established near Pyongyang, the capital of North Korea. Later, South Korean Defense Minister Yi Ki-paek claims North Korea conducted a long-range guided missile (Scud-C prototype) test north of the city of Wonsan in Hamgyong-Namdo.1988: North Korea upgrades the Scud-B program to a Scud-C program, increasing the missile’s range to about 373 miles (600 km). The same year, North Korea signs the Geneva Protocol, which prohibits the use of “asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of bacteriological methods of warfare.”1989: North Korea starts to develop the Rodong, also called “Nodong,” intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM).1990: North Korea successfully launches a Scud-C missile over the Sea of Japan. A U.S. intelligence satellite also photographs the launch of a new IRBM (Rodong-1), with an estimated range of 620 miles (about 1000 km).1991: North and South Korea are admitted into the U.N. General Assembly. North Korea produces between four and eight Scud-C missiles per month, purportedly for resale rather than security. The country reportedly completes its prototype of the Rodong-1. South Korea’s Ministry of Defense reports that North Korea has produced at least 1,000 tons of chemical warheads for its missiles, in violation of the Geneva Convention.1992: U.S. CIA Director Robert Gates announces that North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs “are our most urgent national security threat in East Asia.” He says, “North Korea has invested heavily in the military and depends on arms sales for much of its hard currency earnings.”1993: North Korea successfully launches four missiles from Taepodong in Hwadae-gun. U.S. and Japanese intelligence officials suspect two of the missiles to be Rodong-1 missiles. They were reportedly fired at target buoys in the Sea of Japan. One missile traveled 311 miles (500 km) and another traveled about 62 miles (100 km); the other two reportedly did not surpass 62 miles.1994: In January, South Korean news outlet Hanguk Ilbo reports that North Korea has 12 to 18 Rodong-1 missiles and is developing the Rodong-2. In February, U.S. intelligence satellites detect a new missile hardware mock-up at Pyongyang, which the U.S. designates as “Taepodong-2.” According to the intelligence report, the dimensions of Taepodong-2 suggest that it could travel up to 2,175 miles (3,500 km). In March, U.S. officials report that North Korea is building two new medium-range missiles: Taepodong-1 (1,000+ mile range, or 1609+ km) and Taepodong-2 (2,000+ mile range, or 3,218+ km).1995: CIA Director James Woolsey tells the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence that the technology is “moving from an era of Scuds of single-stage missiles into an area of Taepodong-1 and -2s with ranges in the few thousands of kilometers — not quite intercontinental yet, but the path is clear.”1998: North Korea conducts the first flight test of its two-stage Taepodong-1 IRBM. The first stage of the missile separated, or fell off, about 186 miles (300 km) east of the launch site, decreasing the mass of the remainder of it. The second stage continued over the Island of Honshu and landed in the Pacific Ocean 205 miles (330 km) east of the Japanese port city of Hachinohe, after flying about 857.5 miles (1,380 km). North Korea says the launch was an attempt to place a satellite in orbit. Japan calls the launch a “very dangerous act… [that] will have a serious impact on the security of northeast Asia.” The U.S. says it’s “concerned” about the launch.1999: U.S. intelligence reports say that North Korea conducted propulsion tests for the Taepodong-2 missile in April or May. The reports say that North Korea refurbished its missile launch pad and is transporting rocket fuel to storage centers.2003: North Korea withdraws from the NPT and starts acquiring “weapons-grade plutonium” from spent fuel rods.2005: North Korea announces that it possesses nuclear weapons.2006: North Korea test fires Taepodong-2, Rodong and Scud missiles. The Taepodong-2 can now travel about 9,320 miles (15,000 km). Later that year, North Korea reportedly conducts a successful nuclear test.2009: North Korea says it carried out a second nuclear test, as well as additional missile tests.2012: North Korea launches an Unha-3 rocket that puts its first satellite into space.2013: North Korea says it conducted a third nuclear test.2015: North Korea says it tested a submarine-launched missile and has developed technology to mount nuclear warheads on missiles.2016: North Korea claims it successfully tested a hydrogen bomb. Later in the year, the country says it conducted a fifth nuclear test and several ballistic missile tests.2017: Throughout the year, North Korea launches several missiles and announces that it conducted a sixth nuclear test. In May, North Korea fires an “intermediate-range Pukguksong-2 ballistic missile” into the sea, as well as the Hwasong-12. In July, Pyongyang says it carried out its first successful intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), the Hwasong-14. In August, North Korea flies a missile over Japan for the first time since 2009. In September, North Korea reportedly launches its sixth nuclear test: a hydrogen bomb estimated to have an explosive yield of 120 kilotons. North Korea also launches ICBMs in September and November.2018: North Korea meets with South Korea and U.S. leaders to discuss denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. In March, North Korea agrees to halt its testing of both nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. In June, U.S. President Donald Trump meets with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un for the first time; Trump later declares on Twitter that North Korea is “no longer a nuclear threat.” A month later, The Washington Post reports that U.S. spy agencies have seen signs that North Korea is constructing new ICBMs. U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo also tells the U.S. Senate that North Korean factories “continue to produce fissile material” used in making nuclear weapons. In a meeting with South Korean leaders in September, Kim reportedly agrees to permanently dismantle at least one nuclear test site and shut down at least one missile launch site, contingent on unspecified measures taken by the U.S.

North Korean leader’s sister attends Olympics opening ceremony.
On Friday, North Korean leader Kim Jong Un’s sister Kim Yo Jong attended the opening ceremony at the Olympic Games in South Korea. During the ceremony Kim shook hands with South Korea’s President Moon Jae-in. She also delivered an invitation from her brother for Moon to visit North Korea at the “earliest date possible.”Moon has  that the two Koreas should work on “establishing the right conditions to realize this meeting,” according to South Korean spokesperson Kim Eui-kyeom. Moon has also asked that North Korea resume dialogue with the U.S., the spokesperson . If the meeting happens, it would be the first between Korean leaders in more than 10 years.Kim Yo Jong is a member of North Korea’s politburo. She is included on a U.S. list of sanctions related to alleged links to human rights abuses. Kim is the first member of the Kim family to visit South Korea since the 1950-1953 Korean War.Kim Yong Nam, president of North Korea’s Presidium of the Supreme People’s assembly, also attended the ceremonies. U.S. Vice President Mike Pence attended the opening ceremony as well. Pence's office confirmed that he did not meet with or speak directly to Kim. The vice president also did not attend a dinner hosted by Moon before the ceremony. Pence  the U.S. would continue to apply “maximum sanctions” to the North.2018 Winter OlympicsThe Olympic Games officially began on Friday in Pyeongchang. Last month, in his New Year’s address, Kim Jong Un  he would be willing to send a delegation to the Games. A meeting to discuss the details was held in South Korea on Jan. 9. On Jan. 17, the two countries announced that the delegation would include players for a joint Korean women’s ice hockey team.North Korea has participated in the Olympics since 1972. It boycotted the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, and the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul.

North Korea-US meeting no longer canceled; Trump and Kim to meet June 12 in Singapore.
On Friday, President Donald Trump  he would meet with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in Singapore on June 12. Before his announcement, Trump met with North Korean Gen. Kim Yong Chol in the Oval Office. The meeting lasted more than one hour, during which Gen. Kim gave Trump a personal letter from Kim Jong Un. White House Chief of Staff John Kelly and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo were also in attendance. Trump  it was a "getting-to-know-you-plus meeting” with a discussion about “a lot of things,” including ending the Korean War between North and South Korea. Kim Yong Chol is North Korea's former military intelligence chief and an advisor to Kim Jong Un. Kim Yong Chol was present at the April 27 inter-Korea meeting between Kim Jong Un and South Korean President Moon Jae-in.Trump and Kim Jong Un had originally scheduled the June 12 meeting on May 10 and Trump cancelled it on May 24, writing to Kim Jong Un it would be “inappropriate” to meet “based on the tremendous anger and open hostility displayed in your most recent statement.” Earlier that day, North Korea’s vice minister of foreign affairs had , “I cannot suppress my surprise at such ignorant and stupid remarks gushing out from the mouth of” Vice President Mike Pence. She also called him a “political dummy.” Pence had made comments comparing North Korea to Libya on May 7.

US has 1-year plan to dismantle North Korean nuclear, other WMD programs, Bolton says.
On Sunday, National Security Advisor John Bolton  the U.S. had developed a program to dismantle all of North Korea’s weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballistic missile programs within a year. He  he was “sure” that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo would be discussing the program with North Korea in the “near future.” Bolton  the year-long program would require “full disclosure” of all chemical, biological and nuclear programs, as well as ballistic missile sites in the country. “If they have the strategic decision already made to do that, and they’re cooperative, we can move very quickly,” Bolton . “And it is to North Korea's advantage to dismantle very quickly. Then the elimination of sanctions, aid by South Korea and Japan and others can all begin to flow,” he added.“Physically, we would be able to dismantle the overwhelming bulk of [North Korea’s] programs within a year," Bolton . Stanford University academics have proposed a 10-year roadmap for the complete denuclearization of North Korea. Some say it could take less than 10 years.On Sunday, South Korean media reported that U.S. Ambassador to the Philippines Sung Kim met with North Korean officials that day to discuss plans for Pompeo’s next visit to the North. Patrick Cronin, senior director of the Asia-Pacific Security Program at the Center for a New American Security,  U.S. and South Korean officials indicated Sung Kim was preparing a trip by Pompeo to Pyongyang at the end of this week. The State Department has not confirmed such travel plans. Pompeo recently spoke about North Korea with the foreign ministers of China, Japan and South Korea, according to the State Department.Washington Post and NBC News report on North Korean weapons activitiesThe Washington Post reported on Saturday that U.S. intelligence officials have concluded that North Korea has secret weapons facilities, that the latest evidence suggests it does not intend to give up all its nuclear weapons and that it may hide the number of weapons it has.NBC News reported that a U.S. official briefed on the latest North Korean intelligence , “There's no evidence that [North Koreans] are decreasing stockpiles, or that they have stopped their production” of weapons. The official added, "There is absolutely unequivocal evidence that they are trying to deceive the U.S."U.S. intelligence does not know the exact number of nuclear weapons North Korea has, according to Reuters. The Defense Intelligence Agency estimates that North Korea has about 50, and all intelligence agencies have concluded the country is concealing weapons.When asked about “new reports this weekend” on “Fox News Sunday,” Bolton , "I am not going to comment on any reports, true, untrue, or partially true, about intelligence.” Bolton added, “I will just say this: Not answering the specific reports we've seen over the weekend ... we are using the full range of our capabilities to understand what North Korea is doing."On CBS News’ “Face the Nation,” Bolton , “We know exactly what the risks are — [North Korea] using negotiations to drag out the length of time they have to continue their nuclear, chemical, biological weapons programs and ballistic missiles.”President Donald Trump met with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in Singapore on June 12 to discuss denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and other issues. After the meeting, the two leaders released a statement saying Trump “committed to provide security guarantees” to North Korea, and Kim “reaffirmed his firm and unwavering commitment to complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”On Fox News Channel’s “Sunday Morning Futures with Maria Bartiromo,” Trump  of Kim, “I made a deal with him. I shook hands with him. I really believe he means it.”Bolton , "There's nobody involved in this discussion with North Korea in the administration who is overburdened by naïveté. We've seen how the North Koreans have behaved before. The President's been very clear. He is not going to make the mistakes of prior administrations. We are going to pursue this, and we will see what happens."Bolton also  Sunday on "Face the Nation" that “we’re going to try and proceed to implement what the two leaders agreed to in Singapore.” He , “Kim Jong Un was very emphatic several times in Singapore; he was different from prior regimes.” He added, "Now, we'll let their actions speak for themselves.”

Cluster #76: 8 stories
FBI raids home and office of Trump’s lawyer Michael Cohen.
On Monday, FBI agents raided the home and office of Michael Cohen, personal lawyer to President Donald Trump. The agents, from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York, executed search warrants and took possession of communications between Cohen and his clients, emails, tax documents and business records, according to The New York Times. Cohen’s own lawyer, Stephen Ryan,  in a statement, “I have been advised by federal prosecutors that the New York action is, in part, a referral by the Office of Special Counsel, Robert Mueller.” Mueller is investigating alleged Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election and possible coordination between the Trump campaign and Russia. Ryan  the seizure of protected attorney client communications was “unnecessary” and that “Mr. Cohen has cooperated completely with all government entities, including providing thousands of non-privileged documents to the Congress and sitting for depositions under oath." Ryan did not specify what records were taken. Among other records, the FBI obtained documents related to Cohen’s payment of $130,000 to former adult-film actress Stephanie Clifford, stage name Stormy Daniels, for signing a non-disclosure agreement regarding her alleged 2006 extramarital affair with Trump, The New York Times reported. The White House denies the allegations that an affair took place between Clifford and Trump.The Washington Post reported late Monday night that, according to three people familiar with the case, Cohen was being investigated for possible bank fraud, wire fraud and campaign finance violations. Spokespeople for the special counsel and for the U.S. Attorney’s Office in New York declined to comment, according to Fox News. 

The facts on the Stephanie Clifford ‘60 Minutes’ interview.
Stephanie Clifford tells ‘60 Minutes’ about alleged 2006 affair with TrumpCBS’s “60 Minutes” aired an interview on Sunday night with Stephanie Clifford, a former adult film star whose stage name is Stormy Daniels. Clifford, 39, told interviewer Anderson Cooper that she had sexual intercourse one time with Trump in 2006, adding that by speaking in the interview she was risking a million dollar fine for violating a non-disclosure agreement. Trump has denied the affair.Clifford alleged that the affair occurred in Trump’s hotel room in Lake Tahoe in July 2006, after the two met during a celebrity golf tournament. She  Trump had told her he could get her a role on his television show “Celebrity Apprentice.”White House Deputy Press Secretary Raj Shah  on Monday that Trump has repeatedly denied the affair, saying there was “nothing to corroborate” Clifford’s account. “The president doesn’t believe any of the claims Ms. Daniels made in the interview last night were accurate,” Shah . He also  Clifford’s account was “inconsistent,” given that in January she signed a statement denying that she ever had a physical or romantic affair with Trump, which Trump’s personal lawyer Michael Cohen publicly released.When Cooper asked why Clifford signed the statement, she  she did so “because they made it sound like I had no choice.” He asked if she meant “legal repercussions,” and she  yes. She declined to discuss whether she had evidence, such as text messages or photos, of the alleged affair.The Wall Street Journal first published an account of the alleged affair in January 2018, when it reported that Clifford had been paid $130,000 to sign a non-disclosure agreement prohibiting her from discussing her alleged relationship with Trump in October 2016, a month before the presidential election. Cohen, Trump’s lawyer, had reportedly arranged the payment through a Delaware-based limited liability corporation he had established. Clifford  she was not the source of the Journal story. Cohen  in February that he did make the payment out of pocket. “Neither the Trump Organization nor the Trump campaign was a party to the transaction with Ms. Clifford, and neither reimbursed me for the payment, either directly or indirectly,” Cohen . His statement followed an allegation that the payment violated campaign finance laws, if it was made by the campaign. Cohen denied Clifford’s claims about the affair.In the 60 Minutes interview, Clifford alleged that she was threatened in 2011 in Las Vegas after she attempted to sell her story to an affiliate of In Touch magazine for $15,000; the story did not run at the time. Two former In Touch employees told CBS that when the magazine attempted to contact Trump for comment, Cohen had  it would be sued if it ran the story. In Touch published the interview transcript with Clifford this year.Clifford  that a man approached her as she was putting her then infant daughter in the car telling her to “forget the story.” She alleged the man , “That's a beautiful little girl. It'd be a shame if something happened to her mom.” When asked if she went to the police, Clifford  did not because she was “scared.”The law firm representing Cohen sent a letter to Clifford’s attorney alleging that she defamed him during her 60 Minutes interview. Regarding Clifford’s claim of being threatened in 2011, the letter , “Cohen had absolutely nothing whatsoever to do with any such person or incident, and does not even believe that any such person exists, or that such incident ever occurred.” The letter called on Clifford to “cease and desist from making any further false and defamatory statements” and to retract previous statements.On Monday, Clifford filed a lawsuit against Cohen for defamation. Her attorney, Michael Avenatti, filed the suit in California, alleging that Cohen released Clifford’s signed denial while “knowing it was false or had serious doubts about the truth of the statements.” 

Giuliani says Trump did not know ‘specifics’ of payments to Cohen, Clifford.
On Fox News’ “Hannity” show on Wednesday, one of Trump’s attorneys, Rudy Giuliani, spoke about several topics including a $130,000 payment by Trump attorney Michael Cohen to adult film actress Stephanie Clifford. Giuliani  Trump had Cohen on a retainer and “didn’t know about the specifics” of Cohen’s use of the money to pay Clifford, also known as “Stormy Daniels.” The payment was part of a non-disclosure agreement about an affair Clifford allegedly had with Trump in 2006.Giuliani  Trump paid Cohen a $35,000 monthly retainer “over several months” when Cohen “was doing no work for the president.” Giuliani added, “That's how [Trump’s] repaying it, with a little profit and a little margin for paying taxes.” Giuliani later  Trump paid Cohen for unspecified “expenses,” and Trump did not know that the money was going towards the 2016 payment to Clifford. Giuliani  Trump became aware of this payment after the case became public.Last month, Trump responded to a reporter’s question on Air Force One to indicate that he did not know about the payment Cohen made to Clifford. On Thursday, White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders , "This was information that the president didn't know at the time but eventually learned.”Clifford’s attorney, Michael Avenatti, tweeted on Wednesday evening: "We predicted months ago that it would be proven that the American people had been lied to as to the $130k payment and what Mr. Trump knew, when he knew it and what he did in connection with it.” In another tweet he , “Trump stood on AF1 and blatantly lied.” “AF1” may be a reference to Air Force One.Possible reasons for the payment to CliffordThe government accountability group Common Cause has filed complaints with the Justice Department and Federal Election Commission regarding the payment to Clifford. Paul S. Ryan, an attorney for Common Cause, , “this payment was to influence the election.” Giuliani  the payment “was about personal reputation. The money wasn’t paid to help the campaign or hurt the campaign.”Former Federal Election Commission Chairman Bradley Smith, a Republican,  that to show there was a violation of federal election laws, election commissioners would require evidence that the payment’s effect on Trump’s campaign was “the” motivation, not “a” motivation for it.Trump’s tweets regarding Cohen’s payment to CliffordOn Thursday morning, Trump tweeted three tweets that together read, “Mr. Cohen, an attorney, received a monthly retainer, not from the campaign and having nothing to do with the campaign, from which he entered into, through reimbursement, a private contract between two parties, known as a non-disclosure agreement, or NDA. These agreements are very common among celebrities and people of wealth. In this case it is in full force and effect and will be used in Arbitration for damages against Ms. Clifford (Daniels). The agreement was used to stop the false and extortionist accusations made by her about an affair, despite already having signed a detailed letter admitting that there was no affair. Prior to its violation by Ms. Clifford and her attorney, this was a private agreement. Money from the campaign, or campaign contributions, played no roll (sic) in this transaction.”

Lawyer alleges Cohen ‘selling access’ to Trump; Cohen says report inaccurate.
Michael Avenatti, attorney for Stephanie Clifford,  on Wednesday that Donald Trump’s lawyer Michael Cohen “appears to be selling access to the president.” Avenatti released a seven-page report on Tuesday that alleged more than $4.4 million had been paid by various entities to Cohen’s company, Essential Consultants, since its creation in October 2016. Cohen  on Wednesday that Avenatti’s report was inaccurate. Cohen, Trump’s personal attorney, used the company to pay adult film actress Clifford, also known as “Stormy Daniels,” $130,000 to sign a non-disclosure agreement regarding an alleged affair she had with Donald Trump in 2006. Trump has denied the affair. Avenatti is representing Clifford in two lawsuits against Cohen and Trump for defamation.Cohen, who is under investigation by the FBI, has not been charged with a crime. Cohen’s lawyer  Cohen has not done anything improper, ABC News reported.The report from Avenatti and Associates alleged that Novartis AG, a global healthcare company, paid a total of about $400,000 to Essential Consultants. Eric Althoff, a spokesman for Novartis AG,  his company paid Essential Consultants a total of $1.2 million over a year under a contract from February 2017 to February 2018. Althoff  Cohen “promised access to the new administration.” Novartis  it determined after a meeting with Cohen in March 2017 that he “would be unable to provide the services that Novartis had anticipated related to U.S. healthcare policy matters.” Novartis  the contract “unfortunately could only be terminated for cause,” such as for a default or a “material breach” on the terms of the agreement, so the company made payments until the contract expired. Novartis  Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s team contacted the company in November of last year and it “cooperated fully” and “provided all the information requested.” Mueller is investigating alleged Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election and “related matters.”Avenatti’s document also alleges that Columbus Nova LLC, an investment firm, paid a total of about $500,000 to Essential Consultants from January to August 2017. Columbus Nova is a U.S. affiliate of Renova Group, founded by Viktor Vekselberg, a Russian that Avenatti alleges has an estimated worth of $13 billion. Vekselberg’s cousin, Andrew Intrater, is CEO of Columbus Nova. Columbus Nova  it is “solely owned and operated by Americans” and that it paid Cohen’s company for consulting on potential real estate investments and sources of capital. An attorney for Columbus Nova  the “claim that Viktor Vekselberg was involved in or provided any funding for Columbus Nova’s engagement of Michael Cohen is patently untrue.” Avenatti , “We have significant evidence to the contrary. We haven’t released all the evidence that we have.” Mueller’s team has questioned Vekselberg, according to The New York Times.Also in Avenatti’s report are allegations that Korea Aerospace Industries, Ltd. (KAI) paid $150,000 to Essential Consultants last November. KAI  Wednesday it had paid Essential Consultants $150,000 for “advice on local accounting standards.”Avenatti’s document alleges there were $200,000 worth of payments from telecommunications company AT Assoc, CNBC, FFIEC, Novartis, Reuters, The Daily Caller, The Washington Pos

In seeming reference to Cohen recording, Trump says ‘inconceivable’ lawyer would tape client.
On Saturday, President Donald Trump tweeted that it was “inconceivable” that a lawyer would tape a client. His current lawyer Rudy Giuliani  Trump did not know he was being recorded in a September 2016 conversation with his then-personal lawyer Michael Cohen about former Playboy model Karen McDougal. McDougal has  she had an affair with Trump in 2006; Trump has denied it. In August 2016, American Media Inc. (AMI), which owns the National Enquirer, bought the rights to McDougal’s story for $150,000 and did not run it, the Wall Street Journal reported. Giuliani  the arrangement involved a “non-disclosure agreement.” Situations in which payments are made to keep stories from becoming public are sometimes called “catch-and-kill.” If a “catch-and-kill” payment is made by a corporation, specifically to aid a presidential campaign, such a payment could be in violation of federal election laws. In 2016, Cohen, through a company he set up, paid $130,000 to adult actress Stephanie Clifford (known as “Stormy Daniels”) as part of an agreement not to discuss an affair she  she had with Trump in 2006. Trump denied the affair. Trump later personally reimbursed Cohen for unspecified “expenses.” Giuliani  Cohen’s payment “was about personal reputation. The money wasn’t paid to help the campaign or hurt the campaign.” He added that Trump had Cohen on a retainer and “didn’t know about the specifics” to which his payment to Cohen related.On Nov. 4, 2016, the Journal published an article about AMI’s deal with McDougal. The article quoted Trump’s campaign spokeswoman at the time, Hope Hicks, as saying, “We have no knowledge of any of this.”In his recorded September 2016 conversation with Trump, Cohen recommended buying the rights from AMI, and Trump asked how they might do that, according to a source familiar with the tape cited by CNN.Giuliani  Friday that “nothing in that conversation suggests that [Trump] had any knowledge of it [AMI’s payment to McDougal] in advance.” Giuliani  that in the taped conversation, Trump had mentioned that any payment "to reimburse AMI for what they laid out” should be done “by check, properly recorded." No such payment occurred, according to Giuliani. “In the big scheme of things, it’s powerful exculpatory evidence [for Trump],” he added.The FBI seized the recording along with other documents from Cohen’s office in April under a search warrant. The Justice Department is investigating Cohen over “personal business dealings.” He has not been charged with a crime in the case.A “special master” decided that 2,633 out of 900,000 documents seized by the FBI from Cohen qualified as privileged or partially privileged, CNBC reported. According to the State Bar of California, “special masters” are court-appointed attorneys who examine seized evidence that has been “in possession or under the control” of attorneys. Special masters “balance the interests” of the attorneys and their clients “in protecting privileged materials” with the interests of prosecutors “in securing evidence of suspected criminal activity.” A “special master” deemed the Trump-Cohen recording to be client-attorney privileged, CNN reported. Trump’s lawyers later requested the privilege be withdrawn, meaning the recording could be used in the government’s investigation of Cohen. Comments on the recordingOn Saturday morning, Trump tweeted, “Inconceivable that the government would break into a lawyer’s office (early in the morning) - almost unheard of. Even more inconceivable that a lawyer would tape a client - totally unheard of  just as is #Trump’s false #Twitter statement made against @michaelcohen212 this morning. Rudy claims the tape is ‘exculpatory’.  Why so angry?”Asked about Davis' tweet, Giuliani , "How would you feel if your lawyer was recording you without telling you?," CNN reported. Giuliani added that Trump's "tweet is straightforward and correct."In April, AMI published a statement that , “Ms. McDougal has always been free to talk about her relationship with President Trump — at least since her 2016 amendment of her contract with AMI — as her 90 minute interview with Anderson Cooper [in March, 2018] made clear.” According to The New York Times, AMI amended its agreement with McDougal in 2016 after the presidential election in 2016.

Michael Cohen pleads guilty to 8 criminal counts.
Michael Cohen pleaded guilty on Tuesday to eight criminal counts related to tax evasion and violation of campaign finance laws. Cohen, a 51-year-old former personal attorney for President Donald Trump, was released on a $500,000 bail to await sentencing.  The plea agreement, approved by the Justice Department's Tax Division and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), called for a Cohen to receive a prison sentence of between roughly three and a half and five years in prison. Without the plea agreement, the maximum sentence for the eight counts would have been 65 years in prison, according to court documents. The eight counts Cohen pleaded guilty to are: 	Five counts of tax evasion for the years 2012 through 2016;	One count of making false statements to a financial institution “in connection with a credit decision” (to receive a $500,000 loan, according to prosecutors);	One count of “willfully causing an unlawful corporate contribution” (in reference to a campaign contribution), and;	One count of making an “excessive campaign contribution.”In court on Tuesday, without mentioning Trump or others by name, Cohen told the judge about two 2016 payments made while working for an “unnamed candidate,” in reference to the illegal campaign contribution charges in the guilty plea. In response to a question from the judge, he  one payment was made “in coordination and at the direction of a candidate for federal office,” and the other was made “under direction of the same candidate.” “I participated in this conduct, which on my part took place in Manhattan, for the principal purpose of influencing the election,” Cohen told the judge. Cohen reportedly made a $130,000 payment to former adult film actress Stephanie Clifford, stage name Stormy Daniels, and a $150,000 payment to American Media Inc. (AMI), the National Enquirer’s parent company, which bought the rights to a story from former Playboy model Karen McDougal, and then never ran it. Both women claim to have had sexual affairs with Trump in 2006, and Trump denies both claims. (Read more about that here.) Trump had previously denied knowledge of Cohen’s payments to Clifford and indirectly to McDougal. Legal opinions differ on whether Trump could be charged for campaign finance-related crimes while in office. The Justice Department’s Office of Legal Counsel holds that a president cannot be indicted while in office.The case against Cohen developed from evidence referred to federal prosecutors in New York by Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s team, which is investigating alleged Russian election interference and possible coordination between Russia and members of Trump’s campaign. In April, the FBI raided Cohen’s home, hotel room and office and seized more than four million documents, including information related to the payments to Clifford and McDougal.As part of Cohen’s plea agreement, he agreed to: pay back taxes as determined by the IRS, currently estimated to be almost $1.5 million; forfeit any property received as a result of making false statements to the financial institution; potentially pay a fine between $20,000 and $1 million; and like serve between 43 and 63 months in prison, in accordance with a “Stipulated Guideline Range.” Cohen is scheduled to be sentenced by the court on Dec. 12. Although the court will not be legally bound by the Stipulated Guideline Range, both the defense and the prosecution agreed to that range and both parties agreed not to appeal if a sentence falls within those guidelines. 

National Enquirer alleged to have ‘catch-and-kill’ documents on Trump.
The National Enquirer, a tabloid owned by American Media Inc. (AMI), reportedly kept a safe containing records of payments used to silence people who had sold AMI stories on President Donald Trump, The Associated Press first reported Friday. The tabloid allegedly bought the rights to stories about Trump and other celebrities with the intention of not publishing them to prevent the stories from being made public. The practice is colloquially known as “catch-and-kill.”News of the safe was published after The Wall Street Journal and Vanity Fair reported that David Pecker, the chairman of AMI, was granted immunity in exchange for giving prosecutors information about how former Trump lawyer Michael Cohen and Trump allegedly paid the tabloid to suppress stories. Prosecutors  the Enquirer had given the Trump campaign prior notice of potentially damaging stories. In one instance, AMI’s Chief Content Officer Dylan Howard arranged a $150,000 payment to Karen McDougal for the rights to her story about allegedly having an affair with Trump in 2006 and 2007. Variety reported that the payment was intended to prevent the story from getting published anywhere.Court papers in the Cohen case obtained by AP  Pecker “offered to help deal with negative stories about [Trump’s] relationships with women by, among other things, assisting the campaign in identifying such stories so they could be purchased and their publication avoided.”According to AP, Pecker and Howard removed the payment records and other documents from the AMI safe in the weeks prior to Trump’s presidential inauguration. People familiar with the documents’ removal did not know whether they were destroyed or moved to a different location.Cohen pleaded guilty on Tuesday to eight charges, including tax evasion and campaign finance violations originating from the alleged payments he made to two women with which Trump allegedly had extramarital sex. The Department of Justice  the payments to the two women violated campaign finance laws, which limit the amount that an individual can donate to a campaign to $2,700. Under the law, a donation can be considered “expenditures coordinated with a candidate or his political committee.” Presidential candidates and their committees are also prohibited from accepting contributions from individuals that exceed $2,700.Cohen, who was allegedly involved in the payment made to McDougal, also reportedly paid $130,000 to former adult film actress Stephanie Clifford, who claimed she had an affair with Trump a decade before he was elected president. Cohen told the judge he made the payments at Trump’s request. Trump has denied having the affairs. Cohen and Pecker are reportedly cooperating with federal prosecutors investigating the payments. While Trump initially  he did not know about the payment to Clifford, he has since claimed to have found out about it “later on.” Trump also  the payments were not taken from his campaign finances.

Stephanie Clifford files defamation suit against Trump.
Stephanie Clifford filed a defamation lawsuit against President Donald Trump on Monday over his characterization of her claim of being threatened in 2011 as a “con job.” The suit, filed in New York by Clifford’s lawyer Michael Avenatti, claims she suffered more than $75,000 in damage.  Clifford, a former pornographic film actress who goes by the stage name Stormy Daniels, claims she had an affair with Trump in 2006 and that a man threatened her life in 2011 after she attempted to sell her story to an affiliate of In Touch magazine. Clifford did not file a police report at the time. She discussed the alleged threat in a 60 Minutes interview and released a composite sketch of the man who allegedly threatened her about two weeks ago. In response to the sketch, Trump tweeted on April 18, “A sketch years later about a nonexistent man. A total con job, playing the Fake News Media for Fools (but they know it)!” Trump also denies the affair.“By calling the incident a ‘con job,’ Mr. Trump's statement would be understood to state that Ms. Clifford was fabricating the crime and the existence of the assailant, both of which are prohibited under New York law, as well as the law of numerous other states,” the lawsuit claims. Clifford has also filed a defamation lawsuit against Trump’s lawyer Michael Cohen, who paid her $130,000 as part of a non-disclosure agreement. That suit alleged Cohen released a denial of the affair that Clifford signed earlier in the year while “knowing it was false or had serious doubts about the truth of the statements.” Last week, a California judge delayed that suit by 90 days while Cohen is being criminally investigated. Avenatti  they plan to file an appeal.

Cluster #148: 11 stories
US trade deficit on goods and services $46.2B in April, down $1B from March.
The U.S. trade deficit on goods and services was $46.2 billion in April, $1 billion less than than the revised March figures, the U.S. Census Bureau and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) reported on Wednesday. The seasonally adjusted numbers, released by the BEA, showed March’s revised trade deficit was $47.2 billion, adjusted down from the $49 billion reported last month. April goods and services exports were $211.2 billion, $600 million more than in March, and imports were $257.4 billion, $400 million less than in March.The U.S. has a trade deficit in goods and a trade surplus in services, which combines to an overall goods and services deficit. The April goods and services deficit was the lowest it has been in seven months. For January through April 2018, the goods and services trade deficit increased by $20.8 billion, or 11.5 percent, compared to the same four-month period the year before. From March to April of this year, the goods deficit decreased by $1.0 billion to $68.3 billion, and the services surplus decreased by less than $100 million to $22.1 billion.Exports of goods increased by $300 million to $141.2 billion in April, with fuel oil exports increasing by $500 million and soybeans and corn by $300 million each. Exports of services increased by $300 million to $70.0 billion in April.Deficits and surpluses in goods with specific countries and regions for April included the following:	China: $30.8 billion deficit (down $3.4 billion from March) 	EU: $13.2 billion deficit	Mexico: $6.0 billion deficit	Canada: $1.7 billion deficit	South and Central America: $4.1 billion surplus	Hong Kong: $2.2 billion surplus	U.K.: $0.9 billion surplusRecent trade tariffsThe administration of President Donald Trump has implemented a number of trade tariffs this year. For a timeline of some of these actions, see our context here. The U.S. implemented 25 percent tariffs on steel imports and 10 percent tariffs on aluminum imports from some countries on March 23. After the U.S. let exemptions from those tariffs for Canada, Mexico and the EU expire on June 1, those regions have  they would implement tariffs on imports from the U.S.On Tuesday, Mexico imposed tariffs ranging from 10 to 25 percent on about $3 billion of U.S. imports, including on pork, apples, potatoes, bourbon, steel and cheese. Mexico announced the tariffs last week as a response to the U.S. steel and aluminum tariffs. According to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, total goods exported to Mexico in 2017 were $243.0 billion and total goods imported were $314.0 billion; the trade deficit in goods was $71.1 billion that year. Also in response to the U.S.’ steel and aluminum tariffs, Canada announced it would impose tariffs on $12.8 billion worth of U.S. imports in July. The EU also  it would impose tariffs on about $2.8 billion worth of U.S. imports in July.  

China imposes 178.6 percent deposit on US sorghum imports, reduces automaker requirements.
On Tuesday, China announced a temporary 178.6 percent deposit for Chinese importers to pay on purchases of U.S. sorghum, a grain used in animal feed and to make alcohol. The deposit, scheduled to take effect Wednesday, is part of a preliminary decision to implement so-called anti-dumping tariffs on sorghum, and would cover some of the costs of the potential tariffs if they’re implemented. The deposit could discourage Chinese import of U.S. sorghum, The Washington Post reported.Also on Tuesday, China  it would phase out its rule prohibiting foreign automakers from owning more than a 50 percent share in companies making vehicles for sale in the country.China began an investigation on Feb. 4 into sorghum imports from the U.S. According to the Chinese Ministry of Commerce, the volume of U.S. sorghum exports to China was 15 times greater in 2017 than 2013, increasing from 317,000 tons to 4.76 million tons, and the price decreased by 31 percent during that time. The ministry’s preliminary ruling  the prices were improperly low, according to CBS News. Wang Hejun, director of the Chinese Ministry of Commerce’s trade remedy and investigation bureau,  the temporary deposit “aims at correcting unfair trade practices.”An anti-dumping tariff or duty is applied to a product that a country believes is priced below fair market value and is designed to counter so-called “dumping” of that product, according to Investopedia. “Dumping” refers to when companies export a product at a lower price than is normally charged in that market in order to eliminate competitors in the foreign market, Investopedia reports.According to Index Mundi, over the past ten years, sorghum prices reached a low of $130.98 per metric ton in June 2010 and a high of $302.53 in Aug. 2011. In March 2018, the price per metric ton was $181.10.Kansas, Texas, Colorado, Oklahoma and South Dakota are the five states that produce the most sorghum in the U.S. Change to automaker requirementsTuesday’s announcement included phased changes to a 1994 requirement for automakers. The 1994 rule prohibited foreign automakers from holding more than a 50 percent share in a joint ventures with local companies that make cars for sale in China. The country  it would phase out the types of vehicles subject to the requirement, removing it from: electric cars and plug-in hybrids in 2018, commercial vehicles in 2020, and consumer passenger vehicles in 2022. China currently imposes a 25 percent tariff on imports of some U.S.-made vehicles.China’s National Development and Reform Commission also  it would remove foreign ownership limits for shipbuilding and aircraft in 2018, Reuters reported.ZTE ruling this week On Monday, the U.S. prohibited American companies from selling to Chinese phone maker ZTE Corp, for seven years. The action was part of a determination by the U.S. Commerce Department that ZTE violated a civil and criminal penalty agreement with the U.S. for illegally shipping U.S. goods to Iran, making false statements and obstructing justice. ZTE agreed to dismiss four employees and discipline 35 more through bonus reductions or reprimands. ZTE also agreed to pay $890 million in fines and penalties and to pay another $300 million if it violated the agreement. In March, ZTE  it had fired the four employees and had not disciplined the 35 others. In its announcement of the action against ZTE, the U.S. Commerce Department , “This is a regulatory action and is unrelated to any ongoing trade-related actions.”About 25 to 30 percent of ZTE’s equipment, including phones and telecommunications networks, comes from the U.S., according to Reuters. ZTE has sold phones to U.S. mobile service providers AT China was not exempted.In March, China announced about $3 billion of tariffs on imports of 128 U.S. goods. In April, the U.S. proposed about $50 billion in potential tariffs on 1,300 categories of Chinese imports.

US proposes $60 billion in tariffs on Chinese products; China then announces planned tariffs.
President Donald Trump signed a memorandum on Thursday instructing the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR) to consider increased tariffs on Chinese goods, saying the tariffs “could be about $60 billion.” He instructed the USTR to propose a list of products for tariffs and tariff increases within 15 days. Later on Thursday, China’s Ministry of Commerce announced plans to impose tariffs on $2.97 billion worth of American steel, aluminum, and pork, in addition to more than 100 American products. The U.S. proposal is to put tariffs of 25 percent on select Chinese goods, where the Chinese proposal is to put tariffs of 15 percent on a group of American goods, followed by potential tariffs of 25 percent on a second group of American products, according to The New York Times. On Friday, previously announced U.S. tariffs on Chinese steel and aluminum took effect. Last year, China exported $2.79 billion of steel and aluminum to the U.S., according to data from the U.S. Commerce Department. By closing on Friday, benchmark stock indexes in Hong Kong and Shanghai had fallen 2.45 percent and 3.39 percent, respectively. By closing on Friday, the Dow Jones was down 1.77 percent, the 

US, South Korea revise 2012 trade agreement, affecting cars, steel, currency.
On Wednesday, the U.S. and South Korea announced an agreement “in principle” on “general terms” for amending the 2012 U.S.-Republic of Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA). Under the new agreement, beginning May 1, South Korea would be exempt from a 25 percent U.S. tariff on steel. Negotiators are finalizing the terms of the deal, which requires domestic approval in both countries before being implemented.Under the agreement, South Korea’s exports of steel to the U.S. would be subject to a quota of 2.68 million tons, about 70 percent of 2015-2017 average exports to the U.S. South Korea was the third-largest exporter of steel to the U.S. in 2016, according to The New York Times.U.S. tariffs on imports of goods from South Korea would remain the same as under the 2012 agreement, according to Krystal Tan, an economist at the research firm Capital Economics. South Korea is subject to the 10 percent tariff on aluminum that Trump announced on March 1, CNN reported.The yearly quota of U.S. vehicles that could be sold in South Korea without adhering to local safety standards would be raised from 25,000 per automaker to 50,000. The agreement would remove labeling requirements on American cars that meet U.S. safety standards and do not meet Korean ones. In 2017, no U.S. car company sold more than 11,000 cars in South Korea, CNN reported. A 25 percent tariff on pickup truck imports from South Korea to the U.S. would remain in effect until 2041; it had been scheduled to be phased out in 2021. The countries also agreed not to manipulate their respective currencies to make their exports cheaper. There was no mechanism of enforcement related to this aspect of the agreement.A joint statement between the countries  the agreement “addresses issues related to investment, tariffs, trade in automobiles, and trade remedies.” Negotiators also made “additional progress” in the areas of pharmaceuticals, customs and textiles.The joint statement added, “This represents important progress in improving U.S.-Korea trade and economic relations, based on their strong and enduring security relationship.”According to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, the original KORUS FTA was signed in 2007 and came into effect in 2012. Total trade in goods and services between the countries in 2016 was $144.6 billion. South Korea was the U.S.’ sixth largest trading partner in goods, at $112.2 billion total. The U.S. trade deficit in goods with South Korea was $27.7 billion, while in goods and services it was $17.0 billion. In 2016, top export categories to South Korea from the U.S. were machinery, electrical machinery, aircraft, vehicles, and optical and medical instruments. Top import categories were vehicles, electrical machinery, machinery, pharmaceuticals and mineral fuels. U.S. vehicle exports to South Korea were $2.2 billion and imports were $21 billion.

US, China enact new trade tariffs.
The U.S. and China have implemented a previously announced 25 percent tariff on $16 billion worth of goods from each country on Thursday. The tariffs, which were originally announced on Aug. 7, had been scheduled to automatically go into effect at midnight Eastern time in the U.S. and at 12:01 p.m. in Beijing.The U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods apply to 279 product categories, including semiconductors, plastics, chemicals and railway equipment, according to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). China’s tariffs on U.S. goods include 333 U.S. product categories, such as coal, copper scrap, fuel, steel products, buses and medical equipment.In response to the $16 billion in tariffs, China has filed a complaint with the World Trade Organisation (WTO) against the U.S., claiming it violated trade rules.Representatives from China met with U.S. officials in Washington this week for negotiations on trade tariffs; any possible outcome or resolution from the talks has not yet been made public.China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Lu Kang,  of the talks, “We hope the U.S. side will get along with us to strive for a good result from the talks with a reasonable and practical attitude.” President Donald Trump told Reuters on Monday that he did not “anticipate much” from this week’s tariff talks with China.Reuters cited an anonymous executive at a “major U.S. manufacturer in China” who suggested that uncertainty about the potential duration of trade negotiations had a greater impact on business than the actual tariffs because it made business planning difficult. It is too early for the tariffs to have a noticeable economic impact, Reuters reported.US and China’s trading relationshipThe U.S. and China have the largest trading relationship of any two countries in the world. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the two countries exchanged about $635 billion worth of goods in 2017. That year, the U.S. had a goods trade deficit of $375 billion with China, meaning that the value of goods the U.S. purchased from China was that much higher than the value of the goods China bought from the U.S. Of all the goods the U.S. imp orts, 18 percent come from China, and of all the goods the U.S. exports, 8 percent are bought by China, according to U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis 2016 statistics.An investigation by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) concluded that “the acts, policies, and practices of the Government of China related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation covered in the investigation are unreasonable or discriminatory and burden or restrict U.S. commerce.” Section 301 of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974 allows the president to take action against “unfair” or “discriminatory” trade practices, or trade agreement violations. The Trump administration has used the USTR’s findings to justify imposing tariffs on China. Recent tariff changesOn July 6, the Trump administration implemented 25 percent tariffs on $34 billion worth of Chinese imports. According to The Associated Press, China responded with retaliatory tariffs on a similar value of goods.In addition to the $16 billion in tariffs enacted Thursday, the U.S. compiled a list of $200 billion worth of products that could be tariffed as a potential retaliatory measure against China if it decides to impose additional tariffs against the U.S. As an act of reciprocity, China responded to the U.S.’ list of $200 billion in goods by announcing its own list of goods on which it may impose tariffs if the U.S. implements its additional tariffs. So far, neither nation has imposed those additional tariffs.

A recent timeline of US trade relations.
Under the Trump administration, the U.S. has announced changes to its trade policies, including new tariffs, and is currently negotiating with trading partners. We’ve selected highlights of developments in recent months:	Aug 16, 2017: The U.S., Mexico and Canada begin talks to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Representing the three countries are U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer, Mexican Economy Minister Ildefonso Guajardo and Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister Chrystia Freeland. 	Jan. 22, 2018: President Donald Trump approves tariffs on imported solar panel components and washing machines. This includes a 30 percent tariff on imported solar modules and a 20 percent tariff applied to the first 1.2 million washing machines imported in the first year and a 50 percent tariff on subsequent imports.	March 1: Trump announces global tariffs on steel and aluminum imports. He signs an executive order authorizing the tariffs on March 8, to take effect later in the month. 	March 22: Trump instructs the United States Trade Representative (USTR) to consider increasing tariffs on Chinese goods. Trump  the tariffs “could be about $60 billion.” Later that day, China’s Ministry of Commerce announced plans to impose tariffs on about $3 billion worth of 128 American products.	March 23: The U.S. implements tariffs of 25 percent on steel products and 10 percent on aluminum products with temporary exemptions, originally extending until April 30, for Canada, Mexico, the EU, Australia, Argentina and Brazil.	March 28: The U.S. and South Korea announce an agreement “in principle” on “general terms” for amending the 2012 U.S.-Republic of Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA). A joint statement by the countries  the agreement “addresses issues related to investment, tariffs, trade in automobiles, and trade remedies.” 	April 2: China implements tariffs on $2.97 billion worth of U.S. goods, including steel, aluminum, pork, and more than 100 other American products.	April 3: The USTR proposes a 25 percent tariff on a list of about 1,300 categories of goods imported from China, totaling about $50 billion per year.	April 16: The U.S. prohibits American companies from selling to Chinese phone maker ZTE Corp., for seven years. The company admits it had “illegally shipped U.S.-origin items to Iran, obstructed justice and made a material false statement.” The U.S. Commerce Department  the ban was “a regulatory action and is unrelated to any ongoing trade-related actions.”	April 17: China announces a temporary 178.6 percent deposit for Chinese importers to pay on purchases of U.S. sorghum, a grain used in animal feed and to make alcohol. The aim of the deposit was to correct “unfair trade practices,” the Chinese Ministry of Commerce director , such as “dumping,” which is when companies export a product at a lower price than is normally charged in that market in order to eliminate competitors.	April 19: Russia asks the World Trade Organization for “consultations” with the U.S. regarding the steel and aluminum tariffs. India, China and the EU had earlier petitioned the WTO for similar tariff consultations with the U.S. Consultations allow member states to discuss a complaint and “to find a satisfactory solution without resorting to litigation.” 	April 30: The Trump administration extends the temporary exemptions to the steel and aluminum tariffs, originally implemented on March 23, until June 1.	May 20: U.S. Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin says the U.S. and China have put tariffs “on hold.” According to a joint statement, China will “significantly increase” its purchases of U.S. goods and services. The U.S. had a goods trade deficit with China of $375 billion in 2017.	May 22: China’s Finance Ministry says it will reduce tariffs on U.S. imported cars from 25 to 15 percent of the wholesale price, and reduce tariffs on car parts to 6 percent across the board (from the current 6 to 25 percent, depending on the type).	May 25: The U.S. administration agrees to lift its ban on ZTE Corp. under the conditions the company fire its management team, hire American compliance officers and pay a fine. 	May 29: The U.S. announces it will implement 25 percent tariffs on $50 billion of Chinese products, “related to the acquisition of industrially significant technology,” according to the White House. The tariffs will go into effect after a list of specific products is announced on June 15, the White House says. Also, the U.S., Mexico and Canada plan to continue NAFTA talks. 	Anticipated June 2-4: U.S. Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross is scheduled to meet with officials in China to discuss trade relations, the Chinese Foreign Ministry confirmed.

China introduces tariffs on $3B worth of US exports.
Chinese tariffs on 128 goods imported from the U.S. went into effect on Monday, totaling up to $3 billion dollars U.S., according to the Chinese government. China first announced the plan on March 23, in response to U.S. President Donald Trump’s decision to introduce tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from multiple countries, including China. China is adding a 15 percent tariff on 120 products, including fruits, nuts, wine ethanol and steel pipes, and a 25 percent tariff on eight products, including recycled aluminum and pork. China's Ministry of Commerce released a statement on Sunday night that announced the tariffs would go into effect on Monday.The ministry  that the U.S. tariffs “seriously violate” the World Trade Organization (WTO) policies against non-discrimination in multilateral trade between members. The U.S. steel and aluminum tariffs do not apply to some countries, including Canada, Mexico and South Korea. China’s ministry  the U.S. declined to respond to China’s request through the WTO for consultation on the matter, which the ministry  alleviated the country from obligations to the U.S. “As a WTO member, China has the right not to meet some former obligations to the United States,” the ministry . “China’s suspension of its tariff concessions is a legitimate action adopted under WTO rules to safeguard China’s interests.”On March 22, the U.S. also announced a plan to implement additional tariffs on up to $60 billion of Chinese goods. The U.S. Office of the United States Trade Representative has sent that plan for public review during a period of at least 30 days before implementation. CNN cited Arthur Kroeber, a partner at economic research firm Gavekal, saying that China may respond to those planned tariffs by placing more on U.S. agricultural products. U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin  the U.S. and China are in private discussions aimed at avoiding more increases to tariffs. China’s commerce ministry  it hoped the U.S. would remove its tariffs “as soon as possible so that the trading of products between China and the United States will return to a normal track."The U.S. had a trade deficit in goods to China of $375 billion last year, according to CNN. Chinese news outlet Xinhua reported that China had a trade deficit in services to the U.S. of $255 billion in 2017. 

USDA announces $4.7 billion in first round of aid to farmers affected by trade tariffs.
On Monday, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) announced details of the first round of aid to American farmers to compensate for losses due to retaliatory trade tariffs from China and other foreign countries. The USDA will deliver $4.7 billion to farmers starting next week as part of a aid package announced in July. The USDA  the aid would provide a “short-term relief strategy” for “trade damage from unjustified retaliation by foreign nations,” as directed by President Donald Trump. China, which buys the majority of U.S. soybean exports, introduced tariffs on U.S. goods in response to tariffs implemented by the Trump administration. The majority of the first round of aid will be granted to soybean farmers, with around $3.6 billion designated to them, followed by $290 million for pork farmers and $277 million for cotton farmers. Cotton, corn, dairy, sorghum (a grain used in animal feed and to make alcohol) and wheat farmers will also receive a smaller share of the aid. On Sept. 4, the agency responsible for delivering the aid, the Market Facilitation Program (MFP), will begin taking applications for the first round. To be eligible, farmers from the selected industries must show adjusted gross income for recent tax years of less than $900,000, as well as comply with certain agricultural standards. Maximum payments will be limited to $125,000 per person or legal entity. In July, the Trump administration announced a $12 billion aid package for farmers affected by the tariffs. On Monday, the USDA  the aid could reach $12 billion, noting that any future payments would be determined “in the coming months, if warranted.” “Early on, the President instructed me, as Secretary of Agriculture, to make sure our farmers did not bear the brunt of unfair retaliatory tariffs,” U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue  on Monday. “After careful analysis by our team at USDA, we have formulated our strategy to mitigate the trade damages sustained by our farmers.” Perdue also  circumstances might change at any time, if conditions with China change. Background on the tariffsEarlier this year, the Trump administration introduced a series of tariffs on China, which then responded with retaliatory tariffs. In January, Trump approved tariffs on solar technology and washing machine components, including those from China. In March, the U.S. increased steel and aluminum tariffs, and the following month China implemented tariffs on $2.97 billion worth of U.S. goods, including pork, in response. The U.S. then proposed adding a 25 percent tariff on $50 billion worth of Chinese goods, and China responded with plans to implement tariffs on U.S. goods totaling the same amount, including soybeans. Later in April, China also announced a temporary 178 percent deposit on imports of U.S. sorghum in response to what it called “unfair trade practices.” In July, the U.S. imposed 25 percent tariffs on $34 billion worth of Chinese goods in response to the country’s policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative called those practices “discriminatory” to the U.S. China then imposed tariffs on $34 billion worth of U.S. imports in response, including on beef, soybeans, dairy and other farm goods.The U.S.-imposed tariffs are being implemented under section 301 of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974, which allows the president to take action against “unfair” or “discriminatory” trade practices, or trade agreement violations. Trump has  the tariffs are necessary to address the U.S. trade deficit. He has  “trade wars” are “good” and “easy to win.” The U.S. had a goods trade deficit with China of approximately $375 billion in 2017, according to U.S. figures, meaning the U.S. purchased that much more in goods and products from China than China did from the U.S. The deficit was about $185 billion for the first half of 2018. The U.S. and China have the highest volume of trade of any two countries. Both countries call the other’s trade practices “unfair.” China has alleged the U.S. tariffs violate the World Trade Organization’s rules. 

China announces tariffs on $60B of US goods if US implements planned tariffs.
China announced on Friday that it would “instantly” impose tariffs on $60 billion worth of U.S. products if the U.S. moves forward with a proposal to implement tariffs on $200 billion worth of Chinese goods. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) began reviewing that proposal at the request of President Donald Trump. The plan is currently in a public comment period until Aug. 30. The announced Chinese plan would apply tariffs to 5,207 different U.S. products in four rate categories, China’s Customs Tariff Commission of the State Council announced. The rates would be 5, 10, 20 and 25 percent, on products including alcoholic drinks, auto parts, coffee, furniture, liquified natural gas, leather products, machinery, meat, minerals, nuts, and wood products. The commission  “China was forced to take the countermeasures” because of the U.S. tariffs. “The United States violated consensuses reached by multiple bilateral negotiations and once again unilaterally escalated trade frictions,” the commission . “If the United States acts willfully and puts its additional tariff measures into effect, China will instantly implement such tariff measures.” China also alleged that the U.S. violated World Trade Organization rules and damaged free trade and Chinese interests.Trump has  the tariffs against China are necessary because of the trade deficit the U.S. has with the country. White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders  in a statement on Friday that “China should address the longstanding concerns about its unfair trading practices,” instead of “retaliating.”BackgroundIn June, Trump directed the USTR to create a list of Chinese products that the U.S. could apply a 10 percent tariff on, in case China retaliated against the U.S. for 25 percent tariffs it implemented on $34 billion worth of Chinese imports on July 6. China then did impose retaliatory tariffs on the same amount of U.S. goods.On July 10, the USTR released a list of $200 billion worth of products for a potential 10 percent tariff. Then last week, the White House directed the USTR to plan to increase the proposed tariffs to 25 percent, from 10 percent, for the $200 billion of products. U.S. tariffs are being implemented under section 301 of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974, which allows the president to take action against “unfair” or “discriminatory” trade practices, or trade agreement violations. A USTR section 301 investigation concluded that “the acts, policies, and practices of the Government of China related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation covered in the investigation are unreasonable or discriminatory and burden or restrict U.S. commerce.” On July 11, the U.S. Senate passed a non-binding resolution in a 88 to 11 vote calling on Trump to obtain congressional approval prior to using “national security concerns” as a justification for imposing tariffs on other countries.US-China trade relationsThe U.S. and China have the largest trading relationship of any two countries, annually exchanging about $635 billion worth of goods in 2017, according to U.S. government figures. That year, the U.S. had a goods trade deficit of $375 billion with China, meaning that the value of goods the U.S. purchased from China was that much higher than the value of the goods China bought from the U.S. Of all the goods the U.S. imports, 18 percent come from China, and of all the goods the U.S. exports, 8 percent are bought by China, according to U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis 2016 statistics.  

US delays implementing steel, aluminum tariffs on Canada, Mexico, EU, others.
On Monday, the White House announced it was delaying until June 1 its final decisions on whether to continue metal tariff exemptions for Canada, Mexico and the EU. On March 1, President Donald Trump announced import tariffs of 25 percent on steel and 10 percent on aluminum. On March 23, the U.S. temporarily exempted Canada, Mexico, the EU, Australia, Argentina and Brazil from the tariffs until April 30. The U.S.  it has reached agreements in principle on exemptions with Australia, Argentina and Brazil. In a statement, the White House , “In all of these negotiations, the administration is focused on quotas that will restrain imports, prevent transshipment, and protect the national security.”The World Trade Organization (WTO) recognizes an exemption in the 1947 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, allowing countries to impose some tariffs under some conditions when “national security” may be affected.The EU  in a statement the U.S. decision to delay “prolongs market uncertainty, which is already affecting business decisions.” It added that the EU “should be fully and permanently exempted from these measures, as they cannot be justified on the grounds of national security.”Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross  the U.S. was considering imposing import quotas that limit the maximum amount of imports from a particular country, in exchange for exempting some countries from the tariffs. The U.S. had already announced an agreement with South Korea to exempt it from steel tariffs in exchange for the country reducing its steel exports to the U.S. by about 30 percent.The top five countries or blocs of countries from which the U.S. imported steel in January 2018 were Canada, the EU, South Korea, Mexico and Brazil, according to BBC.

USTR announces 25% tariffs on $50B worth of Chinese goods.
On Friday, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) announced a list of Chinese products worth about $50 billion in annual imports that would be subject to 25 percent tariffs. A portion of the tariffs is scheduled to go into effect on July 6. China’s Ministry of Commerce  it would “immediately take tariff measures of the same scale and intensity,” adding that “all economic and trade outcomes of previous talks will now lose effect.”The USTR listed 1,102 products which will be subject to the new tariffs, with 818 products, worth about $34 billion, to be charged duty beginning July 6. The remaining 284 products, worth about $16 billion, would “undergo further review in a public notice and comment process, including a public hearing” before tariffs are applied, according to the USTR statement. The U.S. first announced plans for imposing 25 percent tariffs on Chinese products in April, and China responded by proposing tariffs on U.S. products. During discussions between the the two countries in May, the tariffs were put “on hold,” according to Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin. At the time, China also agreed to “significantly increase” its purchase of U.S. goods and services. On May 29, the White House announced it would implement the 25 percent tariffs, and  the list of specific products would be announced on June 15. The tariffs are being implemented under section 301 of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974, which allows the president to take action against “unfair” or “discriminatory” trade practices, or trade agreement violations. A USTR section 301 investigation concluded “the acts, policies, and practices of the Government of China related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation covered in the investigation are unreasonable or discriminatory and burden or restrict U.S. commerce.” The American public will be able to request tariff exclusions for U.S. companies, according to the USTR statement, which  details would be made public in “the next few weeks.”For more on U.S. trade actions announced this year, see the timeline here.

Cluster #280: 13 stories
White House, TIME respond to magazine cover of crying immigrant child and Trump.
The White House on Friday called a TIME magazine cover that depicted a crying immigrant girl superimposed next to President Donald Trump “shameful” and a “separation” from the facts, after the reported father of the girl  she had not been separated from her mother. TIME’s editor-in-chief  the girl had become “the most visible symbol of the ongoing immigration debate in America” and the cover “captured the stakes” of the issue. Last week, the cover of the July 2 issue of TIME magazine became available online. The cover featured a photograph of a crying two-year old Honduran immigrant girl looking up on one side, and a separate picture of President Donald Trump looking down, both against a red background. It appeared as if Trump and the girl were looking at each other. The cover , “Welcome to America.” The cover story is about the effects of the Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance policy” to prosecute all adults who illegally crossed the border. The policy has resulted in more than 2,300 children being separated from their alleged parents, according to U.S. officials, before Trump ordered the separations to stop when “appropriate” last week. On Thursday, a man in Honduras who  he is the girl’s father, Denis Hernandez, told The Washington Post that she had not been separated from her mother after crossing the U.S.-Mexico border. He  the mother and girl were detained by border patrol together. On Friday, White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders tweeted from her press secretary account, “It’s shameful that dems and the media exploited this photo of a little girl to push their agenda. She was not separated from her mom. The separation here is from the facts.” Trump retweeted Sanders’ post. TIME editor-in-chief Edward Felsenthal responded to criticism of the magazine cover. “The June 12 photograph of the 2-year-old Honduran girl became the most visible symbol of the ongoing immigration debate in America for a reason: Under the policy enforced by the administration, prior to its reversal this week, those who crossed the border illegally were criminally prosecuted, which in turn resulted in the separation of children and parents,” Felsenthal . “Our cover and our reporting capture the stakes of this moment.” Immigration policy In April, the Trump administration announced a “zero-tolerance policy” that set a goal of charging all immigrant adults found illegally crossing the border with federal crimes for illegal entry or attempted entry. Under federal law, children cannot be held in adult jails. Trump’s policy has resulted in over 2,300 separations of alien children from accompanying undocumented immigrant adults.On Wednesday, Trump issued an executive order to detain “alien families together where appropriate and consistent with law and available resources.” The order called for the attorney general to prioritize adjudication of cases involving immigrant families, and to file a court motion challenging the 20-day limit on detainment of undocumented alien children, which had been imposed by judicial interpretations of the so-called “Flores settlement.”On Thursday, Trump tweeted, "We must maintain a Strong Southern Border. We cannot allow our Country to be overrun by illegal immigrants as the Democrats tell their phony stories of sadness and grief, hoping it will help them in the elections. Obama and others had the same pictures, and did nothing about it!"The photographPulitzer Prize-winning Getty photographer John Moore took the original picture of the girl, Yanela, standing next to her mother, Sandra Sanchez, on June 12 in McAllen, Texas. Media outlets, including TIME, CNN and The New York Daily News, used the photo in stories about immigrant child-family separations at the border. Moore’s original caption on the photo  the mother and child were “asylum seekers” who had “rafted across the Rio Grande from Mexico and were detained by U.S. Border Patrol agents before being sent to a processing center for possible separation.” The Honduran government  U.S. authorities detained the two at a facility in Texas, and that they had not been separated from each other, according to Reuters.Moore  he prefers that his images be used in their original forms and that he was not involved in putting together the TIME cover, according to CNN. He  media outlets can purchase images from Getty and use them in art illustrations.“The TIME cover is an illustration that interprets a wider issue being reported on within the magazine,” Moore . “The photograph I took is a straightforward and an honest image; it shows a brief moment in time of a distressed little girl, whose mother is being searched as they are both taken into custody. I believe this image has raised awareness of the zero tolerance policy of the current administration. Having covered immigration for Getty Images for 10 years, this photograph for me is part of a much larger story."TIME magazine published a story about the photo last Tuesday and issued a correction in a later version of the article: "The original version of this story misstated what happened to the girl in the photo after she was taken from the scene. The girl was not carried away screaming by U.S. Border Patrol agents; her mother picked her up and the two were taken away together.”Descriptions of what happenedBorder patrol agent Carlos Ruiz, who was present when officials stopped Sandra and Yanela Sanchez, described to CBS News on Friday morning what he  happened.“We asked her to set the kid down in front of her, not away from her … and so we can properly search the mother. So, the kid immediately started crying as [Sanchez] set her down. I personally went up to the mother and asked her, ‘are you doing OK, is the kid OK?’ and she , ‘Yes, she’s tired and thirsty and it’s 11 o’clock at night,” Ruiz . Ruiz  border patrol agents “care” and “treat these people as humanely and as best as we possibly can” while they do their jobs. Sanchez’ husband, Denis Hernandez,  she left Honduras for the U.S. via Mexico without telling him, adding that he had not directly been in contact with her. Hernandez  his wife was looking for a “better future,” and wanted to experience the “American dream” and find a job in the U.S., according to The Daily Mail. “I didn't support it. I asked her, why? Why would she want to put our little girl through that? But it was her decision at the end of the day,” Hernandez . He added that his wife was seeking political asylum, without stating the grounds. He  he had heard from his friends that Sanchez paid $6,000 for a “coyote,” someone who smuggles people across the border, to help her cross into the U.S., the Daily Mail reported.Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)  Sanchez was deported from the U.S. in 2013. At that time, immigration officials encountered her in Hebbronville, Texas, and she was deported 15 days later under “expedited removal.”Hernandez  he had three children with Sanchez who were still in Honduras, ages 14, 11 and six.

Trump signs executive order to detain alien families together.
President Donald Trump signed an executive order Wednesday to detain “alien families together where appropriate and consistent with law and available resources.” The order, titled “Affording Congress an Opportunity to Address Family Separation,” called for the adjudication of cases involving detained illegal immigrant families to be prioritized, and for government agencies to make facilities available to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for detaining families together pending legal proceedings.“It is unfortunate that Congress's failure to act and court orders have put the Administration in the position of separating alien families to effectively enforce the law,” the executive order stated.During the executive order signing ceremony on Wednesday, Trump  he “didn’t like the sight or the feeling of families being separated,” adding “it’s a problem that's gone on for many years, too many administrations.” The president  that the zero tolerance policy would remain in place, noting, “the border is just as tough. But we do want to keep families together.”“We are keeping a very powerful border and it continues to be a zero tolerance,” Trump . “We have zero tolerance for people that enter our country illegally.” BackgroundIn April, Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a “zero-tolerance policy” that called for 100 percent of adults found illegally crossing the border to be charged with federal crimes for illegal entry or attempted entry. Under federal law, children cannot be held in adult criminal detention centers, so the policy has resulted in children being separated from parents or guardians.The Obama administration had deprioritized detainment and criminal prosecution of illegal immigrants who were primary caregivers to children, and some families were held in “family residential centers” awaiting civil penalties for illegally entering the country. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) was also able to release families together in the U.S. with electronic monitoring of their location while they were awaiting legal proceedings.Last Friday, the DHS  there had been about 2,000 undocumented children separated from illegal alien adults over a six week period from April through May. On Tuesday, the department provided an updated figure of 2,342 separations since last month. Images of undocumented children crying and being held in fenced-in detention areas were published in the news media. The executive orderThe order called for other agencies, including the Department of Defense, to make “any facilities that are appropriate” available to DHS for “the housing and care of alien families pending court proceedings for improper entry.” DHS would be responsible for reimbursing the other agencies for use of their facilities, the order .The executive order called for the attorney general to “prioritize the adjudication of cases involving detained families,” to “the extent practicable."In addition, the order called for the attorney general to “promptly file” a request with a federal court to modify the “Flores settlement,” to allow DHS to “detain alien families together throughout the pendency of criminal proceedings for improper entry or any removal or other immigration proceedings.” The so-called “Flores settlement,” a 1997 court agreement, limited the length of time that unaccompanied undocumented children may be held in immigration detention. A July 2016 ruling in the Ninth Circuit  the Flores settlement applied to both unaccompanied and accompanied children, and that the agreement did not allow families to be detained with children beyond 20 days, according to the American Immigrant Lawyers Association. Trump , “There may be some litigation.” The president noted, “We will be going through Congress. We’re working on a much more comprehensive [immigration] bill.”After signing the order, Trump  immigrants “can come in through ports of entry if they want, that’s a whole different story. And that’s coming in through a process, and the process is what we want.”Draft legislation At a news conference on Wednesday prior to Trump signing the executive order, Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.)  the House would vote on an immigration bill on Thursday. The bill would include provisions to avoid children being separated from parents, Ryan . “We are going to take action to keep families together while we enforce our immigration laws.”Congressional Republicans are currently drafting two immigration bills that include potential funding for a border wall, and the possible outlining of a procedure to obtain citizenship for recipients of DACA, who are immigrants illegally brought into the country as children. A bill proposed by Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) that is being considered in the Senate proposes doubling the number of federal immigration judges, limiting the processing of asylum cases to a maximum of 14 days and authorizing new temporary shelters for migrant families, Fox News reported.Detention facilities and removalsICE has two family detention centers in Texas and a smaller one in Pennsylvania, with a combined capacity of about 3,000 beds, The Washington Post reported. Nearly 2,600 total beds were occupied in the facilities as of June 9, according to the Post. For adults held individually, ICE leases detention facilities and empty cells from various states and counties. ICE had an average daily detainee population of 41,280 during the 2018 fiscal year to date, which, according to the Post, costs more than what Congress has authorized DHS to spend.In 2017, ICE conducted 143,470 overall administrative arrests, and conducted 226,119 removals of aliens. A removal is the “compulsory and confirmed” movement of an alien out of the U.S. and includes removals resulting from arrests, removals at the border and from the interior, according to ICE. The year prior, under the previous administration, ICE removed 240,255 aliens, 65,332 of which resulted from ICE apprehensions, or arrests. In the past decade, ICE removed the most aliens in a single year during 2012, with 409,849 removals.  

California judge orders separated immigrant children be reunited with parents within 30 days.
A federal judge in San Diego issued a preliminary injunction on Tuesday ordering the government to reunite children with undocumented parents from whom they have been separated under the Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance policy.” The injunction ordered that children under five years old must be reunited with their parents within 14 days, and older children must be reunited within 30 days. The injunction also ordered that detained parents be allowed to contact their children by phone within 10 days if they are not already in contact with them. The injunction further orders parents not be detained or deported without their children unless authorities deem the adults to be unfit as parents or pose a danger to their children.The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) requested the injunction as part of a class-action lawsuit that originated with a case it brought in February on behalf of an asylum-seeking immigrant woman who had been separated from her daughter.The rulingIn the ruling, U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw wrote that the ACLU and those it represented had “demonstrated a likelihood of success [of their case] on the [case’s] merits, irreparable harm, and that the balance of equities and the public interest weigh in their favor, thus warranting issuance of a preliminary injunction.”“The unfortunate reality is that under the present system migrant children are not accounted for with the same efficiency and accuracy as property,” Sabraw wrote. “Certainly, that cannot satisfy the requirements of due process.”Sabraw also concluded that “there is no genuine dispute that the Government was not prepared to accommodate the mass influx of separated children.” “The facts set forth before the court portray reactive governance — responses to address a chaotic circumstance of the government’s own making. They belie measured and ordered governance, which is central to the concept of due process enshrined in our Constitution,” Sabraw wrote.In regards to enforcing immigration law, Sabraw wrote that the injunction “does not implicate the Government's discretionary authority to enforce immigration or other criminal laws, including its decisions to release or detain class members. Rather, the Order addresses only the circumstances under which the Government may separate class members from their children, as well as the reunification of class members who are returned to immigration custody upon completion of any criminal proceedings.”The argumentsIn the filing, the government argued that the court “should give the agencies time to take action, rather than issuing an injunctive order. A court-imposed process is likely to slow the reunification process and cause confusion and conflicting obligations, rather than speed the process of reunifying families in a safe and efficient manner.” Department of Justice lawyers argued that a court injunction would unnecessarily restrict the ability of immigration authorities to carry out their “immigration enforcement mission and address smuggling concerns.”The ACLU alleged that the government had “no meaningful plan” for parent-child reunifications. Lee Gelernt, an attorney with the ACLU, wrote in the filing, “thousands of families remain separated, and many parents have no idea where their children are or how to find them.” Gelernt mentioned that a phone number for parents to call to obtain information on their separated children sometimes put callers on hold for 30 minutes, and this length of time was “infeasible for detained parents.”The Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  in a statement over the weekend that the U.S. government “knows the location of all children in its custody and is working to reunite them with their families.” DHS  that 522 children had been reunited with their parents since May. “This process is well coordinated,” DHS .Lawyers for the government argued that Trump’s executive order last week had addressed the issue of future family separations. The ACLU noted that the president could rescind executive orders at any time and that the order did not eliminate the need for an injunction.After the ruling, Gelernt , “This is a complete victory for these families and children who have been suffering for months.”A Justice Department spokesperson  the decision “makes it even more imperative that Congress finally act to give federal law enforcement the ability to simultaneously enforce the law and keep families together.”Background on the immigration policyThe Trump administration announced a “zero-tolerance policy” in April that called for all adults who were found illegally crossing the border to be charged with federal crimes for illegal entry or attempted entry. Under federal law, children cannot be held in adult criminal detention centers, so the policy has resulted in children being separated from parents or guardians. Last week, Trump issued an executive order that directed immigration authorities to detain “alien families together where appropriate and consistent with law and available resources.”  DHS  last week 2,342 immigrant children had been separated from their parents since April. The Secretary for Health and Human Services, Alex Azar,  on Tuesday that the department has 2,047 immigrant children in its custody.

CBP: Honduran immigrant detained for illegal border crossing committed suicide in May.
On Saturday, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) confirmed Honduran immigrant Marco Antonio Muñoz died last month while in custody at Starr County Jail. Muñoz had been apprehended on May 11 for “attempting illegal entry into the U.S.,” according to a CBP spokesperson. The cause of death was listed as “suicide by self-strangulation and hanging” on May 13, according to a report by the Texas attorney general. On May 11, Muñoz, 39, his wife and 3-year old son were apprehended by the Weslaco, Texas, Border Patrol station after “attempting illegal entry” from Mexico into the U.S. They were taken to the Rio Grande Valley Central Processing Center and, while there, Muñoz “became disruptive and combative,” according to the CBP spokesperson. The Los Angeles Times and The Washington Post both cited an anonymous border agent who  Muñoz became upset after he was told the family would be separated. When immigrants enter the U.S. illegally, the current Department of Homeland Security (DHS) policy may result in children being separated from adults they are traveling with, as reported previously. Specifically, on April 7, Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a “zero-tolerance policy” for immigrants illegally entering the U.S. On May 7, Sessions announced the DHS would refer “100 percent of illegal Southwest Border crossings to the Department of Justice for prosecution.” He also , “If you are smuggling a child, then we will prosecute you and that child will be separated from you as required by law.” Children are prohibited from being put in criminal jails, The Washington Post reported; adults who are prosecuted may be separated from children who are accompanying them.Muñoz was transferred to the Starr County Jail on May 12. The attorney general’s report  he was “combative and noncompliant” at the jail. Muñoz was placed in a padded jail cell at about 10:47 p.m., according to the Starr County Jail’s incident report. Officers at the jail checked on Muñoz every 30 minutes during the night shift and there was a camera in his cell. During the morning shift, beginning at 8:00 a.m., detention officers checked on Muñoz, and the next time the officers checked, they found him unresponsive in his cell, according to the incident report. He was declared dead around 10 a.m., according to the attorney general’s report. The Post cited a border agent who  Muñoz’s wife and son have been released from custody.CBP is conducting an internal review and the Texas Rangers are leading the investigation into Muñoz’s death.

1,995 minors were separated from adults at border in April and May, DHS says (Update).
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) confirmed Friday that between April 19 and May 31 of this year, 1,995 minors were separated from 1,940 “alleged adult guardians” after illegally crossing into the U.S. Children were separated so that authorities could prosecute the adults, a DHS official told reporters. On April 6, Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a “zero-tolerance policy” for immigrants illegally entering the U.S. or attempting to enter illegally. The policy calls for 100 percent of adults found illegally crossing the border to be charged with federal crimes under 8 U.S.C. § 1325(a). Sessions  Thursday that if adults go to a U.S. port of entry to claim asylum, they “are not prosecuted and the family stays intact pending the legal process.”“If you are smuggling a child, then we will prosecute you and that child will be separated from you as required by law,” Sessions  on May 7. Children are prohibited from being put in criminal jails, according to The Washington Post. Minors are then processed as unaccompanied minors through the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). They can be housed in government facilities, placed in temporary foster care or released to sponsors in the U.S. The DHS  it does not separate “infants” from adults. It did not provide the ages of minors who are separated from adults. On Thursday, Sessions  that while in HHS custody, children are provided with food, education in their native language, and health and dental care.Parents or guardians who are separated from children can phone an Immigration and Customs Enforcement department (ICE) hotline or an Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) hotline for information, or to set up lines of communication with children in government custody, according to an ICE flyer. On Friday, a DHS representative told reporters that prosecutions for illegal crossings at the border had more than doubled since Sessions announced the zero-tolerance policy, adding that it is not currently prosecuting 100 percent of cases. “We make decisions based on the ability to detain and the ability of courts to take these cases, but we no longer exempt categories or classes of individuals,” the representative . “Advocates want us to ignore the law and give people with families a free pass,”  the DHS official, who declined to be named. “We no longer exempt entire classes of people.”Reuters reported that 1,800 separations of minors and adults crossing the border took place between October 2016 and February 2018. Adults may be separated from children traveling with them if officials suspect the relationship is fraudulent. Reuters reported approximately 13 percent of separations during this period were due to alleged fraud.Trump’s tweetsLast Friday afternoon, President Donald Trump tweeted, “The Democrats are forcing the breakup of families at the Border with their horrible and cruel legislative agenda. Any Immigration Bill MUST HAVE full funding for the Wall, end Catch

US judge orders temporary pause on deportations of reunited migrant families.
On Monday, a U.S. federal judge ordered the government to temporarily pause any deportations of migrant families reunited after being separated as a result of the Trump administration’s previous “zero-tolerance policy” on immigration. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), representing migrants in a class-action suit, had requested the delays citing “rumors” of “mass deportations.” District Court Judge Dana Sabraw ordered a one week temporary delay on deportations until the Department of Justice (DOJ) could file a response. DOJ attorneys oppose stopping deportations, The Associated Press reported.  The ACLU  in a court filing that there are “persistent and increasing rumors” that “mass deportations may be carried out imminently and immediately upon reunification,” and requested a one week stay between reunification and deportation. The organization  parents who would be deported need time to decide whether to leave their children in the U.S. to seek asylum. This decision “cannot be made until parents not only have had time to fully discuss the ramifications with their children, but also to hear from the child’s advocate or counsel,” the ACLU . The advocate “can explain to the parent the likelihood of the child ultimately prevailing in his or her own asylum case if left behind in the U.S. (as well as where the child is likely to end up living).” In June, Sabraw ordered families to be reunited by July 5 and July 24, for minors under five years of age and those over five years, respectively. The DOJ and Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)  they would not be able to make the deadline due to logistical issues and requested an extension, which the court denied on July 6.The Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance policy” announced in April resulted in adults and minors being separated because the policy called for all adults found illegally crossing the border to be charged with federal crimes for illegal entry or attempted entry. Under federal law, minors cannot be held in adult criminal detention centers, so children were separated from the adults accompanying them. During the zero-tolerance policy, “under 3,000” children were separated from their parents who illegally entered the U.S., according to the HHS. On June 20, Trump signed an executive order to end the practice of separating children and to, instead, detain families together when deemed “appropriate.” The order directed the DOJ to file a request with a federal court to modify the “Flores settlement,”  which in accordance with a 2016 court ruling prohibited immigrant accompanied and unaccompanied children from being detained for more than 20 days. The executive order directed the DOJ to request this time be extended, so that immigrant families could be detained together while waiting for immigration proceedings. On July 10, a federal court ruled against increasing the time limit. 

Caravan immigrants approach, cross US border at San Diego seeking asylum.
About 180 people who traveled north from southern Mexico as part of a caravan over the past month had arrived by Saturday in Tijuana, Mexico at the San Ysidro port of entry to the U.S. Fifty immigrants were admitted to the immigration processing center, according to Alex Mensing of Pueblo Sin Fronteras (People Without Borders), which helped organize the caravan. In a statement on Sunday, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Commissioner Kevin McAleenan  San Ysidro had “reached capacity” and the asylum-seekers "may need to wait in Mexico” while CBP officers processed those already in the facilities. Some groups of people tried to enter the U.S. illegally by climbing over a metal fence, according to a statement on Saturday by Rodney Scott, San Diego Chief Patrol Agent of CBP. Last week, Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen issued a statement saying immigrants seeking asylum should do so in the first “safe” country they reach, including Mexico. To qualify for asylum in the U.S., “applicants must prove they have been persecuted or fear persecution based on their race, religion, nationality, political belief or membership in a particular group,” according to The New York Times. If immigrants request asylum at a port of entry, they are referred to an asylum officer for initial screening, which is called a “credible-fear interview,” and those who pass then present their case before a judge. While waiting for a court date, applicants could be released and if so, they wear an ankle-bracelet monitor, The New York Times reported. Applicants who are rejected in the screening process could be detained and deported.Scott  it is a crime to enter the U.S. somewhere other than through a port of entry, and that immigrants caught doing so would be “arrested and referred for prosecution.” He also  that anyone who “encouraged” immigrants to illegally enter the U.S., or make any false statements to officials, were “giving bad advice” and placing immigrants and their families at risk.The caravan is made up of immigrants from Central America who began traveling north from the city of Tapachula, Mexico, on March 25. At one point, the caravan was made up of 1,200 people, according to The New York Times. Some of the immigrants may apply for protection in other countries, such as Mexico, and others may apply for asylum in the U.S. at a later date.Other caravans have made northward journeys in the past, according to The Washington Post. Media outlets followed the caravan after President Donald Trump tweeted about it on April 1. Volunteer immigration lawyers and paralegals from San Diego, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Las Vegas traveled to Tijuana to help the immigrants with their asylum requests, according to The New York Times.In an April 23 tweet, Trump  he had “instructed the Secretary of Homeland Security not to let these large Caravans of people into our Country.”

463 migrant parents separated from children no longer in US; 879 others reunited as of Monday.
In a court filing on Monday, the government  463 parents of migrant children were no longer present in the U.S., and their cases were “under review.” The filing also  the government had reunited 879 children with their parents so far, and another 538 parents had been cleared for reunions. The filing  917 parents, including the 463 that may have been deported without their children, were either not eligible or not yet determined to be eligible to be reunited with their children.On June 26, U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw in San Diego issued a preliminary injunction ordering the government to reunite all separated migrant children with their parents by this Thursday. Then last week Sabraw ordered the government to temporarily suspend deportations of reunited families and requested it update the court as to how many of the parents of the more than 2,500 separated children in the U.S. were no longer in the country. Some of the separations resulted from the Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance policy,” announced in April, which called for all adults who illegally crossed the border to be prosecuted. President Donald Trump later signed an executive order to end the separations on June 20, ordering authorities to detain “alien families together where appropriate and consistent with law and available resources.” The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) requested that the government provide the court, by the end of the day Tuesday, with a list of migrant parents who had signed a form giving their consent for the government to deport them without their children. The ACLU  in its court filing that migrant parents “urgently need consultations with lawyers, so that they do not mistakenly strand their children” in the U.S. ACLU lawyer Stephen Kang , “We have concerns about misinformation given to these parents about their rights to fight deportation without their children.” The government  all of the migrant parents who it deported had given written consent that they were informed of their rights in their native language.Some parents with criminal records or who are deemed to be unfit may not be eligible to be reunited with their children. Before reuniting families, the government: confirms familial relationships through DNA testing, performs background checks for criminal records, assesses the parents fitness to care for their children, and asks parents if they want to be reunited with their children. About 130 parents have opted not to be reunited, The Washington Post reported. 

17 states sue Trump administration over family separations.
Seventeen states plus the District of Columbia filed a lawsuit against the Trump administration on Tuesday, seeking the reunification of separated immigrant families. The states, all with Democratic attorneys general, including California, New York and Washington, filed the suit in a federal court in Seattle.   President Donald Trump signed an executive order last week to detain alien families together “where appropriate,” without commenting on what would happen with families that were already separated. The lawsuit alleges that the Trump administration "violated the constitutional due process rights of the parents and children by separating them as a matter of course and without any finding that the parent poses a threat to the children," according to the New York Attorney General's Office.It also alleges that the practice of family separations is "irrationally discriminatory" and violates the constitutional guarantee of equal protection "because it targets only people crossing our southwestern border, the majority of whom are from Latin America, and not anyone crossing the northern border or entering the United States elsewhere," according to the New York Attorney General’s Office."The Court should order Defendants to reunite every family separated by these unlawful acts immediately," the lawsuit reads.The states that sued are California, Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia and Washington.In a separate case in a San Diego federal court, a judge is considering a request brought by the American Civil Liberties Union to issue an injunction ordering the administration to reunite separated children with their parents. Background on the immigration policyThe Trump administration announced a “zero-tolerance policy” in April that called for all adults who were found illegally crossing the border to be charged with federal crimes for illegal entry or attempted entry. Under federal law, children cannot be held in adult criminal detention centers, so the policy has resulted in children being separated from parents or guardians. Last week, Trump’s executive order  his administration’s policy was to detain “alien families together where appropriate and consistent with law and available resources.”  The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) last week  2,342 immigrant children had been separated from their parents since April. Alex Azar, Secretary for Health and Human Services (HHS),  on Tuesday that HHS has 2,047 immigrant children in its custody. DHS  in a statement over the weekend that the U.S. government “knows the location of all children in its custody and is working to reunite them with their families.” DHS  that 522 children had been reunited with their parents since May. “This process is well coordinated,” DHS . On Monday, the Customs and Border Protection commissioner, Kevin McAleenan,  Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) would stop referring cases for criminal prosecution involving undocumented parents who arrived in the U.S. with their children, unless the child was in danger or the adult had a criminal record. McAleenan  ICE does not have enough detention space to accommodate all undocumented immigrant families. On Monday, White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders  the U.S. was not changing its zero-tolerance policy. “We’re simply out of resources,” she . “We’re working with Congress, hopefully, to provide more resources and the ability to actually enforce the law.”

US authorities unable to confirm whereabouts of 1,500 immigrant children, report says.
Over the weekend, news outlets reported that U.S. federal authorities were unable to confirm the whereabouts of 1,500 immigrant children. The story was based on a report the Health and Human Services (HHS) Department gave to a Senate subcommittee last month. The HHS's Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) reported on the unaccompanied alien children program, which is responsible for the care and placement of children who arrive at the U.S.-Mexico border without a parent or guardian. The report  that during “safety and well-being calls” to 7,635 children and their sponsors from October to December last year, the agency “was unable to determine with certainty the whereabouts of 1,475 children.” The 7,635 well-being calls found that 52 children were living in the care of someone else, eight had run away and five had been deported.The report also  the “long-standing interpretation” of the law has been that ORR was not “legally responsible” for children after they are released to their sponsors, adding that the ORR is “taking a fresh look at that question as a matter of both legal interpretation and appropriate policy.” The office is “exploring the question of ORR’s responsibilities … and whether the level of responsibility would differ depending on the child’s relationship to his or her sponsor,” the report . Approximately 85 percent of sponsors are parents or family members, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) told The Washington Post. The ORR report was presented on April 26 to the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, a subgroup of the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. Steven Wagner, the acting assistant secretary for the Administration for Children and Families spoke before the committee.Separating immigrant children from adultsAs a separate matter, some children also arrive at the U.S. border with adults who are illegally entering the U.S. The current DHS policy can result in immigrant children being separated from these adults upon entry into the U.S.On May 7, Attorney General Jeff Sessions  the DHS would refer “100 percent of illegal Southwest Border crossings to the Department of Justice for prosecution.” He also , “If you are smuggling a child, then we will prosecute you and that child will be separated from you as required by law.” Children are prohibited from being put in criminal jails, The Washington Post reported; adults who are prosecuted may be separated from children they are accompanying. If children are separated from detained adults, Immigration and Customs Enforcement will transfer them to the ORR, according to AP. In 2017, children stayed in ORR custody for 51 days on average, before being placed with sponsors.

Officials say 20,000 alien children to be housed on military bases, 500 reunited with families.
The Department of Defense (DoD) will house up to 20,000 unaccompanied alien children in the coming months, the Pentagon announced. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) made the request, the Pentagon notified lawmakers on Wednesday. Military spokesman Lt. Col. Jamie Davis  on Thursday the Pentagon would support the request.HHS employees or contractors would provide care for the children, “including supervision, meals, clothing, medical services, transportation or other daily needs,” according to the memo to lawmakers. The occupancies could begin as of July, the Pentagon . The DoD would be reimbursed for the costs, in compliance with the Economy Act.Immigrant children have been housed in military bases before. In 2014 under the Obama administration about 7,000 unaccompanied children were housed on three military bases, The Washington Post reported.Separately, an anonymous official from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  on Friday that about 500 alien children have been reunited with their families since May. DHS last week  2,342 immigrant children have been separated from their parents since April. The official did not specify whether the 500 reunited children were still being detained with their families. An anonymous Trump administration official told The Associated Press Thursday that federal agencies were working to establish a centralized reunification process for separated families at a facility north of the border in Texas, at the Port Isabel Detention Center.Trump’s immigration policyOn Wednesday, President Donald Trump signed an executive order that directed authorities to detain “alien families together where appropriate and consistent with law and available resources.” He  his administration would continue its “zero-tolerance” immigration policy that called for all adults who were found illegally crossing the border to be charged with federal crimes for illegal entry or attempted entry.Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced the policy in April. Under federal law, children cannot be held in adult criminal detention centers, so the policy has resulted in children being separated from parents or guardians.Additionally, a 1997 court agreement called the “Flores settlement” limits the length of time that unaccompanied undocumented children may be held in immigration detention. A July 2016 ruling in the Ninth Circuit  the Flores settlement applied to both unaccompanied and accompanied children, and that the agreement did not allow families to be detained with children beyond 20 days, the American Immigrant Lawyers Association reported.Trump’s Wednesday executive order directed the attorney general to “promptly file” a request with a federal court to modify the “Flores settlement,” to allow DHS to “detain alien families together throughout the pendency of criminal proceedings for improper entry or any removal or other immigration proceedings.”Prosecuting illegal immigrant parentsA federal public defender’s office in Texas  Thursday that the U.S. Attorney’s Office would dismiss cases where parents were charged with illegally entering the U.S. and were then separated from their children, the Associated Press reported.“Going forward, they will no longer bring criminal charges against a parent or parents entering the United States if they have their child with them,” wrote the federal public defender for the Western District of Texas, Maureen Scott Franco, in an email. The Trump administration has not publicly  criminal charges would not be pursued.Immigrant detentions and costsICE has two family detention centers in Texas and a smaller one in Pennsylvania, with a combined capacity of about 3,000 beds, The Washington Post reported. Nearly 2,600 total beds were occupied in the facilities as of June 9, according to the Post. For adults held individually, ICE leases detention facilities and empty cells from various states and counties.ICE had an average daily detainee population of 41,280 during the 2018 fiscal year to date, which, according to the Post, costs more than what Congress has authorized DHS to spend.According to The National Immigrant Justice Center, congressional appropriations law has required ICE to maintain a “detention bed quota” since 2009, currently requiring the agency to have 34,000 immigration detention beds on a daily basis. The cost of detaining one person per day is about $159, the center reported, at an approximate total daily cost of $5.5 million and an annual cost of more than $2 billion. The ICE 2018 budget places the average cost to maintain one adult detention bed at about $134 a day.Due to the increase in separations from parents since the zero-tolerance policy was announced in April, authorities have created so-called “tent cities” to house alien children. HHS  beds cost $775 per child per night, NBC News reported.ICE has used alternatives to detention (ATD) for illegal immigrants who do not pose a risk to public safety to be released while awaiting immigration hearings. ATDs can cost ICE between 70 cents and $17 per person per day, according to the National Immigrant Justice Center, and can include parole, bond, home visits, reporting to ICE offices and GPS monitoring devices.Immigrant removalsIn 2017, ICE conducted 143,470 overall administrative arrests, and conducted 226,119 removals of aliens. A removal is the “compulsory and confirmed” movement of an alien out of the U.S. and includes removals resulting from arrests, removals at the border and from the interior, according to ICE. The year prior, under the previous administration, ICE removed 240,255 aliens, 65,332 of which resulted from ICE apprehensions, or arrests. In the past decade, ICE removed the most aliens in a single year during 2012, with 409,849 removals.

Tens of thousands demonstrate for immigrant families to be reunited.
On Saturday, tens of thousands of people participated in demonstrations organized by “Families Belong Together” to call for undocumented immigrant children to be immediately reunited with their families. In Washington, D.C., an estimated 30,000 demonstrators gathered in Lafayette Park near the White House, according to The Associated Press. There were more than 700 events around the country, including thousands who marched across the Brooklyn Bridge in New York, and thousands who marched in Chicago.On its webpage, Families Belong Together had a link to a petition that read, “We demand that the Trump administration stop caging children and jailing their families IMMEDIATELY -- and reunite children in immigration custody with their families at once!”Families Belong Together was formed and supported by multiple organizations, including The Leadership Conference, National Domestic Workers Alliance, MoveOn and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU).As part of Saturday’s demonstrations, people protested on the bridge connecting El Paso, Texas with Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, and others gathered in protest outside a Border Patrol station in McAllen, Texas.During the demonstrations, police arrested five people for blocking a road outside an Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) office in Dallas, and at least one person was arrested in Columbus, Ohio, when protesters blocked a downtown street, AP reported. Family detention policy developmentsThe demonstrators were protesting the more than 2,000 children separated from their undocumented immigrant parents as part of the Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance policy” since April. Last Tuesday, a federal judge in San Diego ordered the federal government to reunite separated children with their families within 14 days of the court’s injunction for children under five years old, and within 30 days for older children. The Department of Health and Human Services  it was reviewing its entire caseload of about 12,000 immigrant children under government care to ensure compliance with the ruling. Some of these children may have been separated from parents before the “zero-tolerance policy” was announced in April, and others may have been found unaccompanied.In a June 20 executive order, President Donald Trump called for the attorney general to file a request with the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California to modify the “Flores settlement” so the government could detain alien families together during proceedings, such as criminal ones for illegal entry into the country.The 1997 “Flores settlement” is a “consent decree” court agreement that resulted from a constitutional challenge of U.S. practices and regulations regarding the detention of unaccompanied immigrant children. Courts and the government have in the past interpreted the Flores settlement to limit detainment of both unaccompanied and accompanied children to 20 days.On Friday, the Department of Justice (DOJ) filed documents in a Los Angeles court regarding the Flores settlement, in which the DOJ argued that families could now be detained together since the San Diego injunction barred them from being separated, unless adults were deemed “unfit” as parents or a danger to their children. Lee Gelernt, deputy director of the ACLU Immigrants’ Rights Project,  the government did not have to detain families, and could release parents who do not pose a flight risk or danger to the community. He also  undocumented migrant parents can choose to release their children if they do not want them to be held in a family detention center.

HHS has ‘under 3,000’ separated immigrant children; will use DNA tests for parental verification.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Alex Azar  Thursday that HHS had identified “under 3,000” children who had been separated from their immigrant parents after crossing into the country illegally. Azar  the department arrived at the number after a “review and comprehensive audit of multiple data sets,” and that included in the number were “approximately 100” children under the age of five. He  HHS would conduct DNA tests to expedite verification of parent-child relations prior to reuniting them.The Trump administration announced a “zero-tolerance policy” in April that called for all adults who were found illegally crossing the border to be charged with federal crimes for illegal entry or attempted entry. Under federal law, children cannot be held in adult criminal detention centers, so the policy has resulted in children being separated from parents or guardians.A federal judge in California last week issued a preliminary injunction ordering the government to reunite children under 5 years of age with their immigrant parents by July 10, and older children by July 26. Azar  the deadlines were “extreme” and that “we will comply even if those deadlines prevent us from conducting a standard or even a truncated vetting process” to verify parent-child relations and the safety of homes to which children are to be taken.Azar  HHS will be conducting DNA tests on the children using cheek swabs, noting that parent-child relation verification using documents such as birth certificates would take too long to meet the court-ordered deadlines. Cmdr. Jonathan White, the assistant secretary for preparedness and response at HHS,  DNA test results would only be used to match parents with their children. Azar  HHS had previously only reunited children with their parents before they were deported, and now the department will be reuniting families in Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention centers during their asylum proceedings. To expedite reunifications, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is relocating detained parents to holding centers near shelters where their claimed children are, according to The Washington Post.“We want this to be as compassionate a process as it humanly can be,” Azar .Also on Thursday, two members of the House sent a letter to the U.S. attorney general, the DHS secretary and Azar requesting information on every separated immigrant child in U.S. custody. Chairman of the House Subcommittee on Government Operations Mark Meadows (R-N.C.) and Ranking Democrat on the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Elijah E. Cummings (D-Md.) sent the request for information, which was outlined in 11 points that included the age, gender, and location of children and their parents.Azar  HHS currently has more than 11,800 immigrant minors under its care. More than 80 percent of them are teenagers, the majority male, who were unaccompanied in crossing the border, the Post reported.

Cluster #301: 7 stories
Lawyer commits suicide by apparent self-immolation.
David S. Buckel, an attorney, was found dead in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, New York, on Sunday morning after lighting himself on fire. The New York Police Department  Buckel, 60, was pronounced dead at 6:30 a.m. and that his death was a suicide.   In an email sent to The New York Times and other news outlets before his death as well as in a note found near his body, Buckel , “Most humans on the planet now breathe air made unhealthy by fossil fuels, and many die early deaths as a result — my early death by fossil fuel reflects what we are doing to ourselves.”For some of his career, Buckel worked at Lambda Legal, a national nonprofit organization that works to achieve “recognition of the civil rights of lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, transgender people” and people living with HIV. He had left Lambda Legal and was involved in environmental causes, according to The New York Times. During his career, Buckel worked on cases dealing with civil rights for LGBT clients, including:	A lawsuit on behalf of Brandon Teena, a transgender man who was raped and murdered in Falls City, Nebraska, in 1993. This story was portrayed in the movie “Boys Don’t Cry,” for which Hilary Swank, playing Teena, won the Academy Award for best actress.	The 1996 Nabozny v. Podlesny case in Wisconsin, in which the suit of Jamie Nabozny, a gay man, against his former high school led to a ruling that schools have a responsibility to provide gay and lesbian students with an environment free from harassment.	The 2006 Lewis v. Harris case in which the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled same-sex couples were entitled to all the benefits and responsibilities of marriage.	The 2009 Varnum v. Brien case in which the Iowa Supreme Court ruled it was unconstitutional to deny same-sex couples the right to marry. With this ruling, Iowa became the third state to legalize same-sex marriage.

A guide to Confederate monuments by state.
In the U.S., there are at least 718 monuments and statues, 109 public schools, 80 cities or counties, 10 U.S. military bases, and nine state holidays representing or honoring the Confederacy or its leaders, according to the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC). While some states have laws or ordinances prohibiting the removal of such monuments, at least 14 statues have been removed since 2015. Some decisions to remove statues have occurred after multiple public debates, followed by a city council vote.The statue of Confederate General Robert E. Lee in Charlottesville, Virginia, has been the most widely covered in the media over the past week. The following is a list of other states that have removed Confederate monuments, and states that prohibit such action:Removal efforts by state:California: On Aug. 16, the United Daughters of the Confederacy asked the Hollywood Forever Cemetery to remove a 1925 Confederate monument that marked the graves of at least 30 Confederate veterans and family members, according to CNN. The monument had been featured in a Los Angeles Times op-ed. The United Daughters, who own the statue, didn’t provide a reason for the removal. However, a Change.org petition was drafted requesting the owners remove the monument.Florida: In May, the Alachua County Commission in Gainesville, Florida, voted 4-1 to donate the town’s Confederate statue to the United Daughters of the Confederacy, which had originally installed the statue at the county’s Administration Building in 1904. The group had 60 days to decide whether to accept the donation and pay for its removal. On Aug. 14, the association paid to relocate the statue to a local cemetery. After holding three meetings on whether to remove the statue, the county commission voted to replace the statue with something that “represents the shared values” of its residents, according to the Gainesville Sun. Although the article says that the debate about the statue began in 2015 after Dylann Roof killed nine African-American churchgoers, it didn’t provide the reason for its eventual removal.In June, the city of Orlando began the process of moving a Confederate statue from Lake Eola Park to a cemetery. The statue was originally given to the city in 1911 by the United Daughters of the Confederacy. In May, the mayor gave his reasons for removal: “These statues are subject to various interpretations. Some, like myself, see them as historical markers dedicated to men who died during a war. Other perceive it as a symbol of white supremacy and the vestige of slavery. With this understanding and our City’s commitment to inclusiveness, I am proposing to move the statue to a more appropriate location at Greenwood Cemetery within the confederate veterans section.” He added, “As we move this plan forward, I believe this proposal balances the inclusive morals of our community today, while carefully preserving historic artifacts from our past that can be used to further educate and serve as important lessons in today’s society.”Kentucky: In April 2016, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer announced plans to remove a Confederate monument from 1895. Fischer cited “practical” reasons, such as new traffic patterns around the statue, and “civic” reasons, such as residents having objected to a Confederate monument on public land. After his announcement, a group of residents and the Sons of Confederate Veterans filed a lawsuit against its removal. The city ultimately won the lawsuit and relocated the statue to Brandenburg, Kentucky, in November 2016.Louisiana: In December 2015, New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu signed an ordinance calling for the removal and relocation of four Confederate monuments displayed on public property in the city. The city council approved the ordinance by a 6-to-1 vote and declared the monuments public “nuisances” pursuant to Section 146-611 of the city code. In April 2017, the mayor announced plans to remove the first of the four monuments. The mayor  at the time that the city came to this decision “after a lengthy public process that determined these statues failed to appropriately reflect the values of diversity and inclusion that make New Orleans strong today.” The last monument was removed in May.Maryland: In July 2017, a statue of a Confederate soldier was removed from Rockville, Maryland’s Red Brick Courthouse. According to The New York Times, the United Daughters of the Confederacy donated the statue in 1913 and County Executive Isiah Leggett ordered its removal from government property in 2015. Upon its removal, Leggett , “this statue is inaccurate because it pays tribute only to the more than 200 Montgomery County young men who fought for the Confederacy, not also to those County residents who fought to preserve the Union and free those held in bondage. Therefore the statue does not represent a balanced view of our County’s sacrifice during the Civil War.”In August, Baltimore Mayor Catherine Pugh ordered the removal of four Confederate statues in the city. In an interview with The New York Times, Mayor Pugh  it was in the “best interest” of the city, citing security concerns after the protest in Charlottesville, Virginia. The Times says the city hasn’t announced plans for their relocation.Missouri: St. Louis officials began dismantling a Confederate statue in a park in June. Though media outlets mention that the statue was often vandalized, they don’t provide a reason for its removal. Under a legal agreement, the Missouri Civil War Museum has agreed to take ownership of the statue and its removal.  More states: New York, Wisconsin, Alabama, Georgia, Texas and Washington have either made plans or are reviewing plans to remove some of their Confederate monuments, with some noting societal divisions as the motive for their removal, according to CNN. Officials from Arizona and Pennsylvania have opposed the removal of their state’s Confederate monuments. Arizona Governor Doug Ducey , “It’s not my desire or mission to tear down any monuments or memorials. We have a public process for this. If the public wants to be engaged on this, I’d invite them to get engaged in it.” And Pennsylvania’s Gettysburg National Military Park  it has no plans to remove any of its “1,300-plus monuments, markers or plaques.” Some states that prohibit statue removal:Georgia: Title 50, article 3, section 1 of the state’s code says “It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to mutilate, deface, defile, or abuse contemptuously any publicly owned monument, plaque, marker, or memorial which is dedicated to, honors, or recounts the military service of any past or present military personnel of this state, the United States of America or the several states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or the several states thereof, and no officer, body, or representative of state or local government or any department, agency, authority, or instrumentality thereof shall remove or conceal from display any such monument, plaque, marker, or memorial for the purpose of preventing the visible display of the same. A violation of this paragraph shall constitute a misdemeanor.”Mississippi: State code 55-15-81, enacted in 2013, says no “War Between the States” monuments or memorials on public property shall be “relocated, removed, disturbed, altered, renamed or rededicated,” unless the structure interferes with the “construction, maintenance or operation of public transportation facilities.”North Carolina: The “Cultural History Artifact Management and Patriotism Act of 2015” restricts the removal, relocation or alteration of any monument located on public property without the approval of the “North Carolina Historical Commission.”South Carolina: Section 10-1-165 of the state constitution says no “War Between the States” monuments or memorials “erected on public property of the State or any of its political subdivisions may be relocated, removed, disturbed, or altered.” The statute may change “upon passage of an act which has received a two-thirds vote on the third reading of the bill in each branch of the General Assembly.”Tennessee: This state’s “Heritage Protection Act” of 2016 also prohibits the removal of statues, monuments, etc., erected to honor military conflicts, historical military figures and events, or historic organizations located on public property.An SPLC timeline of Confederate installations can be found here.A New York Times list of states that have proposed to remove their Confederate statues can be found here

3 Sandy Hook parents file defamation lawsuits against Alex Jones.
On Monday, three parents of children killed in the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting filed two defamation lawsuits against Alex Jones, a radio host and owner of the Infowars website. Jones has suggested that parents of Sandy Hook shooting victims were actors, and has  media coverage of some mass shootings was “totally staged.” After the lawsuits were announced, he  the “contexts of the suits” were not accurate and that his lawyers were confident they would be dismissed. The lawsuits were filed in Travis County, Texas, where Jones resides and has an Infowars studio.Neil Heslin brought one of the lawsuits; his six-year-old son Jesse died in the Sandy Hook attack. Leonard Pozner and Veronique De La Rosa brought another; their six-year-old son Noah died in the attack. Mark Bankston, a Houston lawyer, is representing them. Bankston is also representing a 24-year-old man in another case in which Infowars allegedly  the man was the perpatrator in the shooting at a high school in Parkland, Florida, that killed 17. A 19-year-old man, Nikolas Cruz, has been charged with the Parkland shooting.The lawsuits by the Sandy Hook parents are seeking $1 million in damages from Jones, Infowars, and affiliated Free Speech Systems LLC. One of the lawsuits  the Infowars statements were “a continuation and elaboration of a years-long campaign to falsely attack the honesty of the Sandy Hook parents, casting them as participants in a ghastly conspiracy and cover-up.” One of the lawsuits  the “defendants’ defamatory statements were knowingly false or made with reckless disregard for the truth.”On Dec. 14, 2012, a single shooter killed 20 children and six adults in Newtown, Connecticut.Jones’ broadcasts and the lawsuit claimsAccording to one of the lawsuits, in September 2014, Infowars published an article with the headline “FBI SAYS NO ONE KILLED AT SANDY HOOK.” It also says in December 2014, Jones  on his radio show, “The whole thing is a giant hoax. How do you deal with a total hoax? It took me about a year, with Sandy Hook, to come to grips with the fact that the whole thing was fake.” When asked by NBC News’ Megyn Kelly in June 2017 about his “giant hoax” comment, Jones  he sometimes plays “devil’s advocate.”In November 2016, Jones aired a segment called “Alex Jones Final Statement on Sandy Hook.” In April 2017, Jones aired a segment called “Sandy Hook Vampires Exposed.” In the 2016 video, Jones , “I don’t know what really happened.” He  the “official story” of the event has “holes in it.” He added that he questioned the “PR and talking points” around the incident. During a broadcast, Jones has  that opponents of the Second Amendment could be involved in the “giant hoax” of Sandy Hook, according to The New York Times.In a June 2017 news segment about Jones, Heslin told NBC News’ Megyn Kelly, “I lost my son. I buried my son. I held my son with a bullet hole through his head.” Owen Shroyer, a reporter at Infowars who is named in one of the lawsuits,  after Heslin’s interview that Heslin could not have held his son because Sandy Hook parents identified their children after the shooting through photographs. Heslin’s lawsuit says Shroyer’s claim is false and that children’s bodies were given to their parents for their funerals.Pozner and De La Rosa’s lawsuit refers to Jones talking about an interview that CNN’s Anderson Cooper did with De La Rosa after the shooting. In 2014, Jones referred to a moment in which Cooper turns his head and his nose seems to disappear; Jones called it proof that he was talking in front of a screen and wasn’t actually at the town square in Newtown, Connecticut, where the Sandy Hook shooting occurred. The Times reported that this was a “compression artifact,” which is a “distortion that is common in video encoding.”Jones’ responseIn a broadcast in response to the lawsuit, Jones , “I believe Sandy Hook happened,” and later, “I believe kids died there. I’m sorry for your loss.” He talked about a “police stand down” and that the media response was “totally staged” in multiple mass shootings. Jones  more than 10 lawsuits had been filed against him in the “last few months” by “Democratic Party-connected firms.” He  his lawyers were “very confident” these suits were “frivolous,” that what was put in the “contexts of the suits” was “not accurate” and that they would be dismissed. Related casesIn June 2017, a judge sentenced Infowars viewer Lucy Richards to five months in prison for leaving messages for Pozner that included telling him, “you gonna die, death is coming to you real soon.” Richard’s sentence specified that she was no longer allowed to access Infowars.In March, a Virginia man named Brennan Gilmore sued Jones for saying Gilmore was a “deep state shill” and a “CIA asset.” Gilmore recorded and posted online a video of a car that drove into a crowd, killing at least one, in Charlottesville, Virginia, last year during a “Unite the Right” rally. Jones  none of the InfoWars coverage of Gilmore was knowingly false.See our past coverage of a misleading news story by Infowars here.

The Simpsons' addresses criticism of Indian character Apu.
On Sunday, the Fox network aired a new episode of “The Simpsons” television show titled, “No Good Read Goes Unpunished.” During the episode, the show addressed recent criticism regarding a character named Apu Nahasapeemapetilon.Apu is an Indian character who owns a convenience store. In a 2017 documentary titled “The Problem with Apu,” Indian-American comedian Hari Kondabolu criticized the character’s portrayal of South Asians and referred to Apu’s portrayal on the show as “racist.” Sunday’s episodeAt one point in Sunday’s episode of “The Simpsons”, Marge Simpson reads her daughter, Lisa, a book from Marge’s childhood called, “The Princess in the Garden.” Marge revises the book to modernize it — for example, she replaces the main character who has “many native servants” with a “cisgender girl” who “fights” for “wild horse rescue” and “net neutrality.” After doing so, Marge says the story is “as inoffensive as a Sunday in Cincinnati.”In response, Lisa says it “sounds like [the revised main character] starts out pretty perfect,” adding, “since she’s already evolved, she doesn’t really have an emotional journey to complete.” Marge replies, “Nope.” Lisa continues, “Kinda means there’s no point to the book.” Marge responds by saying, “Well, what am I supposed to do?” Lisa says, “It’s hard to say. Something that started decades ago and was applauded and inoffensive is now politically incorrect. What can you do?” The cartoon then shows a photo next to Lisa’s bed of Apu, signed with the words “Don’t have a cow, Apu.”Marge then says, “Some things will be dealt with at a later date,” to which Lisa replies, “if at all.” The two then look at the audience.The documentaryIn the documentary, Kondabolu  he didn’t “hate” the show and that he actually  “always loved” it. He told USA Today before his documentary’s premiere that Apu’s character “is funny. It has nothing to do with the character being funny, (but at the same time) it’s insulting, it’s inaccurate and it represents a larger problem where people don’t get to speak for themselves.” On the TruTV website for the documentary, it calls Apu a “stereotypical character.”Apu is voiced by white actor Hank Azaria, who  after Kondabolu’s documentary last year that he thought it “made some really interesting points and gave us a lot at ‘The Simpsons’ to think about and we really are thinking about it.” He added, “definitely anybody that was hurt or offended by it, by any character or vocal ... performance, is (sic) really upsetting that that was offensive or hurtful to anybody.” Azaria declined to be interviewed in the documentary.Response to Sunday’s episode After the show, Kondabolu tweeted, “Wow. ‘Politically Incorrect?’ That’s the takeaway from my movie  why this is important. The Simpsons response tonight is not a jab at me, but at what many of us consider progress.”Others also tweeted criticism of the show. After Sunday’s episode, stand-up comedian W. Kamau Bell tweeted, “The Simpsons, 1989 - 2018 #RIP,” and, “I think the fact that they put this ‘argument’ in the mouth of Lisa's character, the character who usually champions the underdogs and is supposed to be the most thoughtful and liberal, is what makes this the most ridiculous (as in worthy of ridicule) and toothless response.” Kondabolu had appeared on FX’s “Totally Biased With W. Kamau Bell” in 2012, and did a routine about Apu on the show. One of “The Simpsons” writers, Al Jean, tweeted before the show, “New Simpsons in five minutes. Twitter explosion in act three.” Some tweeted support for the show. A self-described Indian Twitter user tweeted, “Loved how you guys handled this non-issue. People just want to cry about everything nowadays b/c it makes them feel like they’re doing something. Don’t ever change!” Jean retweeted the post. One twitter user named Henry wrote, “Every character is a stereotype. Homer is an overweight, beer-drinking, dumb American, Marge is a housewife, Bart is a stereotypical boy, Lisa is a stereotypical girl, Mr. Burns is a white, old, money obsessed CEO, Cheif Wiggium (sic) is an overweight, donut-eating lazy cop etc.”

Colorado State University to change tour policies after police question 2 prospective students.
On April 30, Colorado State University (CSU) police pulled two teenage brothers of Native American descent out of a campus tour and questioned them. Police were responding to a 911 call from a woman on the tour, who  the teenagers looked as if “they don’t belong.” Police let the teens rejoin the tour after one of them showed the officers an email with a reservation for the tour. The university later tweeted, “We deeply regret the unwelcoming and concerning experience they had while guests on our campus,” and  it would change its tour policies, including providing guests with badges or lanyards.The two brothers, Kanewakeron Thomas Gray, 19, and Skanahwati Lloyd Gray, 17, had joined the tour late after driving about seven hours from their home in New Mexico. The woman who called 911 mentioned their lateness to the dispatcher. She  the teens did not respond to some questions people asked of them, and that they were wearing black clothing with “weird symbolism or wording on it.” While on the tour, Thomas wore a black shirt and Lloyd wore a sweatshirt, both from death metal bands.The woman reportedly  she thought the teens were lying. She  one of them laughed after she asked the other what he was thinking of studying. Thomas, the older of the two,  in an interview that he is interested in earning a doctorate in music, and his brother plans to major in visual arts.The woman, who was touring the campus with her husband and at least two of her children, , “One of them had his left hand in his oversized sweatshirt the whole time.” She added, “I’m probably being completely paranoid with everything that’s happened.” She  her husband told her another man on the tour also “believes [the teens] don’t belong.” The female campus police dispatcher asked if they were white males. The woman responded that she thought they were Hispanic and that one had  he is from Mexico.On Friday, the university released the police report and one of the officers’ body camera footage from the incident, with some editing to blur the teens’ faces and delete audio portions. In the body cam footage, one officer tells Lloyd to get his hand out of his pocket, and then the officer pats down the pockets of Lloyd’s sweatshirt. One of the officers asked why the teens did not respond to questions on the tour, and Thomas  Lloyd is shy. Lloyd showed the police his ID and an email on his phone confirming that they had signed up for the campus tour.One of the officers told the teens as he let them go, “Sorry to take you away from the group. Have a good rest of your day.” The tour had moved on and the teens were not able to rejoin it. The university  the tour guide was “unaware that police had been called or responded,” and the group had continued without the teens.CSU respondsOn May 2, three administration vice presidents sent an email to students as part of their “commitment to be transparent in communicating about issues related to race occurring on our campus.” They , “this incident is sad and frustrating from nearly every angle, and that they “deeply regret the experience of these students while they were guests on our campus.”On Friday, the university’s president, Dr. Tony Frank,  the school had been unsuccessful in contacting the Grays, and wanted to offer them reimbursement for their travel expenses and a V.I.P. tour of the campus. Frank  the school had been discussing potential changes to how it manages campus tours and that it would “move as soon as possible” to provide badges or lanyards for tour guests identifying them as visitors. He also  the school would have campus police contact tour guides if they wanted to talk to a tour member, and that tour guides would give introductions to people on their tours so that “anyone with questions or concerns views the tour guide as the first point of contact.”Frank also , “People of all races, gender identities, orientations, cultures, religions, heritages, and appearances belong [at CSU].”The Grays respondThomas  his family had not decided if the teens would return to the university or whether they would apply there. He  on Friday, “We drove seven hours to pretty much get the cops called on us.” On Friday, the teens’ mother, Lorraine, , “My immediate thought was they’re being profiled because they’re different.” Lorraine Gray is an “indigenous activist,” according to The Guardian.One of the officers mentioned in his report that he spoke to Lorraine on the phone. He , “I explained to her that law enforcement is obligated to follow up on any call that we receive and that the reporting party was suspicious because of the boys’ actions alone.”The teens are originally from the Mohawk Nation of Akwesasne in New York and had moved to New Mexico about a decade ago.

A brief look at the life and language of Kanye West.
Kanye West recently made headlines for tweeting his support for Donald Trump and saying “slavery for 400 years” “sounds like a choice.” Here's an overview of his life, accomplishments and previous comments and actions that made headlines. Who is Kanye West?Full name: Kanye Omari West.Born: June 8, 1977 in Atlanta, Ga., to Ray and Donda West.Spouse: Kim Kardashian West (2014 – present).Children: North West, 4; Saint West, 2; Chicago West, 3 months.Personal life: West’s father was a photojournalist, a former Black Panther member and counselor. West’s mother was a teacher. After his parents divorced in 1980, West moved with his mother to Chicago’s South Shore neighborhood. In 1987, he and his mother moved to China for one year where she taught for a university exchange program. After returning to Chicago, West graduated from Polaris High School and won a scholarship to study at Chicago's American Academy of Art. West went to college for one year before dropping out to pursue a music career. West’s mother became his manager before she died in 2007 of heart disease at the age of 58. In 2015, West received an honorary doctorate from the School of the Art Institute in Chicago.Music career: West started his career by producing for local artists. In 2001, he moved to New York City and produced the track “This Can't Be Life,” for rapper Jay Z. The following year, he produced several other tracks for Jay Z. He then went on to contribute tracks to artists such as Cam'ron, Talib Kweli, Nas, T.I., Beyoncé, and Ludacris.In 2002, after getting into a car accident that required his jaw to be wired shut, West wrote and recorded a song about his experience called, “Through the Wire,” while his jaw was still wired shut. According to Rolling Stone, the song helped West gain publicity for his first album, The College Dropout. In addition to creating his own music, West continued to produce tracks for other artists, including musicians John Legend and Brandy.Studio Discography2004: The College Dropout2005: Late Registration2007: Graduation2008: 808s  Heartbreak2010: My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy2013: Yeezus2016: The Life of Pablo2018: TBDAwardsKanye West has won 21 Grammys and has been nominated 68 times. For example, he won Best Rap Album for his debut, “The College Dropout,” in 2004. He is tied with Jay Z as the most decorated hip-hop artist in Grammy history. According to Billboard, West has had seven of his albums reach the number one slot on the publication’s “Billboard 200” list, which ranks the most popular album of the week in the U.S.West in the News2005: During the Live 8 concert tour, which raises awareness of global poverty and AIDS, West  AIDS was a “man-made disease” that was “placed in Africa just like crack was placed in the black community to break up the Black Panthers.” About two months later, West discussed then-President George W. Bush’s handling of Hurricane Katrina during NBC's “A Concert for Hurricane Relief.” West , “George Bush doesn't care about black people.” He also criticized the media, adding, “I hate the way they portray us in the media. If you see a black family, it says they're looting. See a white family, it says they're looking for food.”2009: West interrupted singer Taylor Swift’s acceptance speech at the MTV Video Music Awards after she won for Best Female Video. West walked on stage while Swift was talking and took the microphone to say that Beyoncé had “one of the best videos of all time.” West later apologized to Swift.2010: In President Bush’s memoir “Decision Points,” he described West’s Hurricane Katrina comments as an “all-time low” point of his presidency. In response to Bush’s memoir, on a Houston-based radio show, West  he could understand how Bush felt because he had also been called racist. He added, “With both situations, it was strictly a lack of compassion that America saw. You know, with him not rushing, not taking the time to rush down to New Orleans. With me, it was the lack of compassion in cutting someone off in their moment. Nonetheless, I think we're all quick to pull a race card in America. And now I'm more open, and the poetic justice that I went through the same thing that he went through, and now I really more connect with him on a humanitarian level, because that next morning, when he felt that, I felt that same thing too.”2011: During a performance in England, West : “I walk through the hotel and I walk down the street, and people look at me like I'm insane, like I'm Hitler,” he . “One day the light will shine through and one day people will understand everything I ever did.”2014: During a performance in Australia, West asked all audience members to stand. When two people did not stand, he halted the show until someone could investigate why. One person was in a wheelchair, the other had a prosthetic leg. Once he became aware of their condition, he continued with the performance. West’s actions received criticism on Twitter and other social media platforms, according to The Daily Mail.2015: After musician Beck won the Grammy for “Album of the Year,” West walked onto the stage, then stopped and walked back down. After the show, West  Beck should have given the award to Beyoncé. West publicly apologized to Beck three weeks later.2016: At a concert in San Jose, Calif., West told the audience that he didn't vote in the presidential election, but he “would've voted on Trump.” He described Trump's campaign as “absolutely genius.” He also  he intends to run for president in 2020. According to USA Today, audience members shouted expletives at West as he left the stage.2018: In a Tuesday interview with media outlet TMZ, West discussed “free” thinking. He , “When you hear about slavery for 400 years. For 400 years? That sounds like a choice.” He added, “it’s like we’re mentally in prison.

Kanye West says slavery ‘sounds like a choice,’ ‘we’re mentally in prison’.
In a Tuesday interview with media outlet TMZ, hip hop artist Kanye West discussed “free” thinking. He , “When you hear about slavery for 400 years. For 400 years? That sounds like a choice.” He added, “it’s like we’re mentally in prison.” One of the interviewers, Harvey Levin, asked West about his comments on slavery and “choice,” to which West replied as he motioned with his hands towards his head, “Right now, we’re choosing to be enslaved.”At one point in the interview, West stood up, turned to the TMZ newsroom and asked, “Do you feel that I’m being free and that I’m thinking free?” A female voice , “Yes.” Black TMZ staffer Van Lathan , “I think what you’re doing right now is actually the absence of thought.” He added, "You're entitled to your opinion, you’re entitled to believe whatever you want, but there is fact and real-world, real-life consequence behind everything that you just .” Lathan continued, “We have to deal with the marginalization that has come from the 400 years of slavery that you  for our people was a choice. Frankly, I’m disappointed, I'm appalled, and brother I am unbelievably hurt by the fact that you have morphed into something to me that’s not real." West later walked over to Lathan and , “I’m sorry I hurt you.”Last week, West tweeted a picture of himself with a hat that , “Make America Great Again,” President Donald Trump’s campaign slogan. West was asked about the hat in the TMZ interview before his comments on slavery. He , “I’ve never been into politics. I just love Trump. That’s my boy.”Reaction on social mediaMusician Will.I.Am tweeted, “Reality: its not  it Disrespects their suffering...”Actor and director Wendell Pierce tweeted, “It is clear that @kanyewest is being sensational for the sake of publicity. I could care less about that. But for you to use the murder and holocaust of slavery for your own self aggrandizement is at the core of your vile appeasement of white supremacists." Pierce also tweeted, “Slavery wasn’t a choice, it was a crime against humanity without a denouement of Justice.”Director Spike Lee wrote on Instagram, “My brother, OUR ancestors did not choose to be stolen from Mother Africa. OUR ancestors did not choose to be ripped of OUR religion, language, culture.”Candace Owens, Communications Director for Turning Point USA, which supports free markets and limited government, was at TMZ with West. She tweeted, “The message that @kanyewest is trying to deliver is one of unity. We’ve grown so used to Hollywood preaching “acceptable hate” that love has become a controversial position.” Dilbert comic strip creator Scott Adams tweeted a video in which he  of Kanye: “His critics are completely, you know, misinterpreting what he’s saying.“West tweets after the interviewAfter the interview, West tweeted, “we need to have open discussions and ideas on unsettled pain.” He also tweeted, “we are programmed to always talk and fight race issues. We need to update our conversation.” According to BBC, West also tweeted, “to make myself clear. Of course I know that slaves did not get shackled and put on a boat by free will.”In another tweet, West  “the reason why I brought up the 400 years point is because we can't be mentally imprisoned for another 400 years. We need free thought now. Even the statement was an example of free thought It was just an idea,” according to CNN.He also tweeted “I freed a thousand slaves I could have freed a thousand more if only they knew they were slaves. - Harriet Tubman,” CNN reported. Some people  on Twitter that there is no proof Tubman  that, according to CNN.

